---
layout: post
title: Ep 7 - Polygamy Special Pt. 2 Joe and all his bro&#x27;s and their hoe&#x27;s!
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-7-polygamy-special-pt-2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep7-polygamy-special-pt-2-joe-and-all-his-bros-and-their-hoes
category: History
date: 2014-12-06 19:43:03 +0000
---

<http://traffic.libsyn.com/nakedmormonismpodcast/Episode_7_complete.mp3>

On this episode, we continue to examine the recent essays released by
the Mormon church on polygamy in early church practices. The first essay
told us how the church arduously stopped polygamy, but didn\'t talk
about Joseph Smith very much. Well that\'s what the second essay was
for. The church titled it, \"Plural Marriage in Kirtland and Nauvoo\".
The church finally came out and talked about Joe\'s 30 to 40 wives and
it is a doooozie! This episode is packed with way more information than
I initially thought it would be, when I first started researching the
3000 word essay. I hope you enjoy!

Welcome to this the seventh episode of the Naked Mormonism podcast, I\'m
Bryce Blankenagel and thank you for joining me. Last episode covered the
first of two essays that the church released in relation to polygamy.
The first essay was titled \'The Manifesto and the end of plural
marriages\'. This essay talked about the church\'s practice of
muli-wivery shortly leading up to 1890 when the manifesto was released,
and shortly thereafter. There were a lot of fun things to examine in it
so if you missed episode6, I highly recommend going back and checking it
out. It helps to provide context for today\'s episodes, and I may even
reference it occassionally. If you only want to know about Joseph
Smith\'s wives, this is the episode for you. We\'re going to read the
second essay today.

Latter-day Saints believe that monogamy---the marriage of one man and
one woman---is the Lord's standing law of marriage.

The first line in and I already have a problem with what it says. Let\'s
have a look at doctrine and covenants section 132 to see if we can
verify what the essay just claimed. D&C 132 is the revelation given to
Joe concerning polygamy and verse 4 says

For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if
ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one
can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

Well, if the standing law of marriage is supposedly one man to one
woman, why is the revelation on polygamy claiming to be an everlasting
covenant? This revelation was given through Joe, on July 1843, but even
the header for this section on the lds.org website says *evidence
indicates that some of the principles involved in this revelation were
known by the Prophet as early as 1831* so they were practicing it well
before the revelation was given in written form. So how can the church
possibly make the claim it just now made, that comprised the first
sentence of this essay?! The standing law of marriage for the latter day
saints, is polygamy that is under momentary suspension. If you want to
see what I\'m saying, read D&C 132 for yourself. It\'s right on the lds
website and I have to admit, it\'s pretty hilarious, and kinda fucked up
too. Regardless, the first line needed to be refuted, let\'s persist.

In biblical times, the Lord commanded some of His people to practice
plural marriage---the marriage of one man and more than one
woman.[2](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#2) Some
early members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also
received and obeyed this commandment given through God's prophets.

A common Christian apologetic to polygamy in the bible is \"Well, god
never explicitly commanded it, it was just a different time back then.
Regardless, polygamy and polyandry are rife throughout the bible, which
is unapologetic about it, and yet, polygamy is repeatedly condemned
throughout the Book of Mormon. It seems like an odd paradigm of
rediculousness and pots calling kettles black. The church also just
claimed that polygamy was a commandment given through God\'s prophets in
biblical times. I don\'t recall that anywhere in the bible. I\'ll have
to assume that it\'s talking about the God of the bible here, even
though Mormonism is clearly not Christianity.

I actually had a listener email me about this. I believe they were a
little displeased with my conflation of Yahweh to Elohim. They mentioned
that the LDS church likes to piggyback on Chrisitanity for the sake of
borrowing credibility. I whole heartedly agree to this proposition.
It\'s kind of the reason we have plagerism and patent laws, you can\'t
legally manufacture and sell a rolex because you\'re stealing the
credibility of the \'Rolex\' name without the companies expressed
written consent. But, in the same way a band can cover a classic public
domain song, and sell it as their own, with very little creative
initiative, Christianity has been repackaged thousands of times to sell
a new product, or a new version of Jesus. That is precisely what
happened with the LDS church with Christianity. Joe needed some
credibility, so he told everyone that Jesus Christ and Heavenly Father
(Elohim) appeared to him in the woods and gave him the exclusive rights
to the only true church. This has happened countless times, where a
single man goes off into the wilderness and receives revelation from
god, and suddenly becomes the mouthpiece of god to guide the world to
new salvation. In fact, the bible is full of prophets just like that, as
is the BoM. Regardless, the distinction does need to be made that
Mormonism does not hold to almost all the usual tenants of Christianity,
nor does it teach that heaven is attainable only through Jesus Christ,
like most liberal Christians believe now, whatever it means. I\'m not
going to go into detail on Mormon doctrine and perceptions of God for a
little while, but I will do a fairly comprehensive analysis of the
similarities and differences between Yahweh and Elohim, and Jesus and
Joseph. So thank you Jimmy for that critique.

After receiving a revelation commanding him to practice plural marriage,
Joseph Smith married multiple wives and introduced the practice to close
associates. This principle was among the most challenging aspects of the
Restoration---for Joseph personally and for other Church members. Plural
marriage tested faith and provoked controversy and opposition. Few
Latter-day Saints initially welcomed the restoration of a biblical
practice entirely foreign to their sensibilities. But many later
testified of powerful spiritual experiences that helped them overcome
their hesitation and gave them courage to accept this practice.

Although the Lord commanded the adoption---and later the cessation---of
plural marriage in the latter days, He did not give exact instructions
on how to obey the commandment. Significant social and cultural changes
often include misunderstandings and difficulties. Church leaders and
members experienced these challenges as they heeded the command to
practice plural marriage and again later as they worked to discontinue
it after Church President Wilford Woodruff issued an inspired statement
(Not revelation, but \'inspired statement\') known as the Manifesto in
1890, which led to the end of plural marriage in the Church. Through it
all, Church leaders and members sought to follow God's will.

Many details about the early practice of plural marriage are unknown.
Plural marriage was introduced among the early Saints incrementally, and
participants were asked to keep their actions confidential. They did not
discuss their experiences publicly or in writing until after the
Latter-day Saints had moved to Utah and Church leaders had publicly
acknowledged the practice. The historical record of early plural
marriage is therefore thin: few records of the time provide details, and
later reminiscences are not always reliable. Some ambiguity will always
accompany our knowledge about this issue. Like the participants, we "see
through a glass, darkly" and are asked to walk by
faith.[3](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#3)

The Beginnings of Plural Marriage in the Church
-----------------------------------------------

The revelation on plural marriage was not written down until 1843, but
its early verses suggest that part of it emerged from Joseph Smith's
study of the Old Testament in 1831. People who knew Joseph well later
stated he received the revelation about that
time.[4](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#4) The
revelation, recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 132, states that Joseph
prayed to know why God justified Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David,
and Solomon in having many wives. The Lord responded that He had
commanded them to enter into the
practice.[5](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#5)

Latter-day Saints understood that they were living in the latter days,
in what the revelations called the "dispensation of the fulness of
times."[6](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#6) Ancient
principles---such as prophets, priesthood, and temples---would be
restored to the earth. Plural marriage was one of those ancient
principles.

Remember how I pointed out when it called the manifesto an \"inspired
statement\" instead of revelation? That\'s because the Church left the
loophole open when they released the manifesto 1 and 2. There was never
any divine revelation that renounced polygamy as a sin, or said that it
shouldn\'t be practiced, that\'s because it was an ancient commandment
given to the ancient Judeo-Christian prophets, and it was restored to
the earth by a revelation through Joseph Smith. If they officially
renounce polygamy, any little credibility that Joe has left, goes out
with the bath water, and the claim of \'restoring\' the original gospel
to the earth becomes completely moot. In my little bit of research for
this podcast, I have come to a conclusion. The church has a very strong
public relations department, and they\'re really good at trying not to
overstep any boundaries. Well, unfortunately, Joe didn\'t share these
sentiments. He was abraisive, polarizing, and literally did whatever the
fuck he wanted and called it revelation from god. I honestly think that
Joseph Smith is the most challenging thing to happen to the church. His
repeated flaunting of, what most considered, christian morals and
teachings has made him the worst part of Mormon history. If the church
could somehow renounce Joe and still survive, it would be the best thing
for them, and it would make PR a lot easier, because they wouldn\'t have
to answer for his crimes. And when I say crimes, I don\'t mean the word
lightly, Joe was a criminal and a societal pariah throughout many times
in his life, so much so that people wanted him dead to the point that
they shot him like a rat in a cage, in carthage jail. Of course, he
killed two others at the same time because somebody smuggled a pistol in
to him, but still, he was hated by anybody that didn\'t follow him or
his teachings. But that was just a little aside that I wanted to
mention, it doesn\'t really have a lot to do with the letter itself.

Polygamy had been permitted for millennia in many cultures and
religions, but, with few exceptions, was rejected in Western
cultures.[7](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#7) In
Joseph Smith's time, monogamy was the only legal form of marriage in the
United States. Joseph knew the practice of plural marriage would stir up
public ire. After receiving the commandment, he taught a few associates
about it, but he did not spread this teaching widely in the
1830s.[8](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#8)

Hmmm, he knew polygamy would stir up public ire? What might possibly
lead him to that conclusion? Possibly because it was considered a
babarous act in \'western cultures\', sharing equivalent moral standing
with cannibalism, scalping, and infanticide. Now, I don\'t necessarily
agree, but I do believe that polygamy, as we understand it in the
context found in the early Mormon church, is a tell-tale sign of a less
developed society. I think that polyandry can be practiced in a
non-barbarous manner, but when polygamy is insconced in a mesongynistic
and patriarchal society, that\'s a sure sign of a horny cult leader
snatching up all the pussy he can.

When God commands a difficult task, He sometimes sends additional
messengers to encourage His people to obey. (That sounds a little mafia
like) Consistent with this pattern, Joseph told associates that an angel
appeared to him three times between 1834 and 1842 and commanded him to
proceed with plural marriage when he hesitated to move forward. During
the third and final appearance, the angel came with a drawn sword,
threatening Joseph with destruction unless he went forward and obeyed
the commandment
fully.[9](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#9)

Let\'s just take a step back for a second and examine that. The first
revelation through Joe we can find that talks about plural marriages, is
actually from July 17, 1831. This is an excerpt from a document that was
recovered in 1974 concerning some interesting early Mormon doctrine.
I\'ll just read the most pertinent part for now.

Verily I say unto you that the wisdom of man in his fallen state,
knoweth not the purposes and the privileges of my holy priesthood. but
ye shall know when ye receive a fulness by reason of the anointing: For
it is my will, that in time, ye should take unto you wives of the
Lamanites and Nephites, that their posterity may become white,
delightsome and Just, for even now their females are more virtuous than
the gentiles.

This document was very tightly concealed in the church history archives,
with only a few copies held by higher ups in the priesthood, until
knowledge of it was realized and persistence to aquire it was made.
Unfortunately, nobody had any way to record the exact revelation as it
was given, when it was given. However, the document that\'s available,
is basically a recollection soon after it happened, by one of the 8
people in the room. Not only that, but there was a newspaper article
reporting a similar revelation barely six months after it was supposedly
given, so there are concurring evidences of this being the first
documented declaration of plural marriage. It didn\'t really sound like
he was under angelic duress when he said that. In fact, it sounded like
he was quite pleased with himself for coming up with the idea to start
turning the native americans into caucasians, cuz that is totally a
thing.

The inference that this was a declaration of polygamy is noted by the
fact that every man in the room was married at the time, and William
Wines Phelps recorded this about the incident:

About three years after this was given, I asked brother Joseph \[Smith,
Jr.\] privately, how \"we,\" that were mentioned in the revelation could
take wives from the \"natives\"---as we were all married men? He replied
instantly \"In th\[e\] same manner that Abraham took Hagar and Katurah
\[Keturah\]; and Jacob took Rachel Bilhah and Zilpah: by
revelation---the saints of the Lord are always directed by
revelation.\"[10](http://www.utlm.org/onlineresources/indianpolygamyrevelation.htm#10)

That\'s so fantastic. You see, the one thing I love about the mormon
church, is it\'s documentation. What I mean is, when you try to examine
a lot of religions and their foundations, it\'s easy to get lost in all
the bias that inherently exists when researching any historical topic
through a retrospective lense. Luckily for us, the church was born
during an age of press freedom and nearly obsessive documenting of
events. Not only can we read what the reported history is, but we can
also see what the people that were actually there said, quoted in
verbatim. This allows us to strip off, at least some of the bias that
exists throughout the recorded history, even if my analysis of the
history, has a bias of it\'s own, at least the facts get through.

Anyway, as for the other instances that the essay eluded to between 1834
and 1842, we\'ll talk about those when we get to the polygamy motherload
episodes.

Fragmentary evidence suggests that Joseph Smith acted on the angel's
first command by marrying a plural wife, Fanny Alger, in Kirtland, Ohio,
in the mid-1830s. Several Latter-day Saints who had lived in Kirtland
reported decades later that Joseph Smith had married Alger, who lived
and worked in the Smith household, after he had obtained her consent and
that of her
parents.[10](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#10) Little
is known about this marriage, and nothing is known about the
conversations between Joseph and Emma regarding Alger. After the
marriage with Alger ended in separation, Joseph seems to have set the
subject of plural marriage aside until after the Church moved to Nauvoo,
Illinois.

Ooooh kay. There was some interesting information couched in that last
paragraph. Fanny Alger is the first girl we have evidence of, as being a
plural wife to Joe, but there were a lot of allegations of Joe getting
frisky with a lot of girls, starting with Emma\'s best friend Eliza
Winters in 1827. Now of course the evidence is a little sparse, but I
intend to cover it in the storyline. But, there are some quotes by Joe
and those around him that seem to substantiate Joe flirting with his
wife\'s bff right after they were married. Let\'s not kid ourselves, Joe
wasn\'t the pious, MoMo do-gooder that most Mormon\'s picture him as. He
was a genius alpha male with a prophet complex; and high sexual
vitality, and often times agression, usually accompany that personality
type. Any assertion of Joe\'s chastity, at any time during his career,
completely falls apart, and is simply wrong, and that\'s exactly what
the church claimed in the last paragraph.

Plural Marriage and Eternal Marriage
------------------------------------

The same revelation that taught of plural marriage was part of a larger
revelation given to Joseph Smith---that marriage could last beyond death
and that eternal marriage was essential to inheriting the fulness that
God desires for His children. (This refers to D&C 132, which has all
kinds of revelations in it, including telling Emma that she can\'t cheat
on Joe, but he can plural marry as many wives as he wants. Diabolical
isn\'t it?) As early as 1840, Joseph Smith privately taught Apostle
Parley P. Pratt that the "heavenly order" allowed Pratt and his wife to
be together "for time and all
eternity."[11](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#11) Joseph
also taught that men like Pratt---who had remarried following the death
of his first wife---could be married (or sealed) to their wives for
eternity, under the proper conditions. (More from section 132)

The sealing of husband and wife for eternity was made possible by the
restoration of priesthood keys and ordinances. On April 3, 1836, the Old
Testament prophet Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in
the Kirtland Temple and restored the priesthood keys necessary to
perform ordinances for the living and the dead, including sealing
families
together.[13](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#13) Marriages
performed by priesthood authority could link loved ones to each other
for eternity, on condition of righteousness; marriages performed without
this authority would end at death.

Any Never-Mormon listeners should know this is refferring to the Mormon
temple marriages and being \"sealed\" to your spouse. When two true
believing mormons are in love, and want to bewed each other, they have
to start the process by having a clean sexual record. That means one of
two things. Either they are virgins getting married, which must
inevitably end in the worst possible, anti-climatic, and massively
dissatisfying apex of just, an overplayed biological act that, ends up
terminating the best day your eternity. And I do mean it when I refer to
Mormon marriage day as the best day of ones eternity because that\'s the
biggest part about marriage in the church. It lasts FOREVER!!! Or, it
could also mean that you and your fiance talk to your bishop about all
the deep-DARK-NASTY-SLIMY shit you\'ve done together in the bedroom.
Please don\'t think I\'m exaggerating when I say the bishop asks you for
details and determines your level of needed repentence, based off what
you report in this meeting. Things that should be completely between a
couple and nobody else, are discussed in a room full to the brim with
palpable shame, and the punishment that follows usually involves; not
taking the sacrament in church, which basically marks you as shameful to
all the people sitting around you, release from church duties,
revocation of temple recommend, or a whole host of other things all
involving overwhelming shame.

So once the couple is prepared and has a sexually clean slate, they both
have to be temple recommend holders. A large percentage of TBM\'s, that
remain consistently active in the church, have these temple membership
cards as basic proof of being able to perform temple duties. One of the
contigent requirements for having a temple recommend is having paid a
\"full and honest tithe\", meaning you are completely caught up on any
back tithing and are planning on continuing to pay this the entire time
you hold the recommend. And of course, they have tithing settlement at
the end of the year which pretty much amounts to the bishop auditing you
to make sure you are indeed paying 10 percent of your income. If you
don\'t essentially settle up and can\'t answer yes to the \"Is this a
full and honest tithe?\" question, the temple recommend is revoked until
you catch up\.... Do you see the cycle of indoctrination?

So, on with our temple recommend holding, hypothetical \'to be married\'
couple. Upon arriving at wedding day, the couple goes in to the temple,
along with any family that holds a temple recommend, and performs the
marriage ceremony, which is coupled with the sealing ceremony. That last
part is the key to the whole \'eternity\' part of the marriage, and that
is why I brought this whole thing up. It said, in the last paragraph,
that Joe taught an individual named Parley P. Pratt that he would be
married to his dead wife in heaven, once he died, but the lord would
allow for him to marry and be sealed again while on earth and take
another wife with him into eternity.

This is the way that the church still practices polygamy today. Any man
that is married, AND SEALED, to a wife, gets her up in heaven forever.
It doesn\'t matter how many times he has been married, he gets all the
women he married, even if he divorced them.

This also illustrates why so many non-mormons don\'t like to attend
mormon weddings. Often times, the non-mormon family members wait out in
the parking lot of the temple while the marriage ceremony is performed
for, paying customers only, and the newlyweds come out of the church
with a smug fuckin grin on their face knowing that they are with each
other for eternity, and they get to muddy-fuck, that clean slate
they\'ve been working for so long to keep unblemished. But to the
friends and family that have been waiting in the parking lot for an
hour, they just get to see the after effects and the reception. No
watching the bride walk down the aisle to be given away by her father,
no ring swap, no kids running around and being annoying, no \"You may
now kiss the bride\", no crowd with soggy tissues, they get nothing! I
never noticed this in my family, probably because we were all devoutly
mormon, but I have heard it being a major point of contention with mixed
faith families. These situations are probably made worse when a member
of a chrisitian family, leaves their faith to convert to mormonism, just
to get married in the temple, all because the TBM bride/groom to be, had
a Joseph Smith stick marinating waaay too far up their anus.

Anyway, that was just a couple of points I wanted to make, and a little
insight I wanted to give, about the day-to-day church doctrine, any
never-mormon listeners. Let\'s get back to the letter to see what else
pisses me off.

Marriage performed by priesthood authority meant that the procreation of
children and perpetuation of families would continue into the
eternities. Joseph Smith's revelation on marriage declared that the
"continuation of the seeds forever and ever" helped to fulfill God's
purposes for His
children.[15](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#15) This
promise was given to all couples who were married by priesthood
authority and were faithful to their covenants.

That was the churches way of telling everybody about the whole marriage
is FOREVER thing. Not that marriage ends at death, nor that marriage
lasts any significant amount of time like the age of the universe (13.7
BY and beyond). IT LASTS FOREVER. Throughout the entirety of the cosmos
and the creation and destruction of countless universes, if you
subscribe to a multiverse theory anyway, YOU\'RE STUCK WITH THE SAME
PERSON!!! Can anybody really imagine that? Our brains haven\'t evolved
to truly comprehend one million yet, and Mormons believe that they will
be married to the same person for countless millions and billions and
trillions of earth years?? I\'m sorry if I sound riled up or if this
rant sounds pointless, but I\'m just a little displeased that I used to
believe in this patently absurd nonesense! I seriously cannot make heads
or tails of, what I used to consider fact, and what I considered to be
part of my faith and, therefore exempt from factual analysis. (time
capsule story if it feels right)

Plural Marriage in Nauvoo
-------------------------

For much of Western history, family "interest"---economic, political,
and social considerations---dominated the choice of spouse. Parents had
the power to arrange marriages or forestall unions of which they
disapproved. (Kinda like Isaac Hale tried to do with Joe and Emma\'s
marriage) By the late 1700s, romance and personal choice began to rival
these traditional motives and
practices.[16](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#16) By
Joseph Smith's time, many couples insisted on marrying for love, as he
and Emma did when they eloped against her parents' wishes. (Well, I
didn\'t think they would just come out and own up to that but okay)

Latter-day Saints' motives for plural marriage were often more religious
than economic or romantic. Besides the desire to be obedient, a strong
incentive was the hope of living in God's presence with family members.
In the revelation on marriage, the Lord promised participants "crowns of
eternal lives" and "exaltation in the eternal
worlds."[17](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#17) Men
and women, parents and children, ancestors and progeny were to be
"sealed" to each other---their commitment lasting into the eternities,
consistent with Jesus's promise that priesthood ordinances performed on
earth could be "bound in heaven."

This referres to the bible scripture that\'s almost solely used to
justify temple sealings.

Matthew 18:18 Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven.

I remember studying temple ordinances in sunday school class, and this
scripture reference was given to me when I asked why people had to be
sealed in the temple. It made sense when I was 11, and it doesn\'t make
sense now\... I must be getting dumber or something\....

The first plural marriage in Nauvoo took place when Louisa Beaman and
Joseph Smith were sealed in April 1841. (For some reason it didn\'t even
talk about the marriages before 1841, it just conveniently skipped over
those) Joseph married many additional wives and authorized other
Latter-day Saints to practice plural marriage. The practice spread
slowly at first. By June 1844, when Joseph died, approximately 29 men
and 50 women had entered into plural marriage, in addition to Joseph and
his wives. (If we add Joe to that statistic, it becomes 30 men and
possibly 90 women. No doubt, Joe was top dawg in the community when it
came to having lots of chicks) When the Saints entered the Salt Lake
Valley in 1847, at least 196 men and 521 women had entered into plural
marriages.[20](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#20) Participants
in these early plural marriages pledged to keep their involvement
confidential, though they anticipated a time when the practice would be
publicly acknowledged.

This, among other motivations, is pretty much why they moved to
God-forsaken Salt Lake in the first place, because nobody wanted to
settle it, and they knew nobody would bother them way out there. But,
they obviously were practicing it as a commandment from God and knew
that He would provide a way for them to follow his commandments, even if
it was illegal at the time.

Nevertheless, rumors spread. A few men unscrupulously used these rumors
to seduce women to join them in an unauthorized practice sometimes
referred to as "spiritual wifery." When this was discovered, the men
were cut off from the
Church.[21](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#21) The
rumors prompted members and leaders to issue carefully worded denials
that denounced spiritual wifery and polygamy but were silent about what
Joseph Smith and others saw as divinely mandated "celestial" plural
marriage.[22](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#22) The
statements emphasized that the Church practiced no marital law other
than monogamy while implicitly leaving open the possibility that
individuals, under direction of God's living prophet, might do so.

That was the LDS.org way of saying what I said last episode. The
spiritual wifery being unauthorized, and the \"statements emphasized
that the church only practiced monogamy\", is referring to the first and
second manifesto that we covered. And it even said in this last
paragraph that \"individuals under direction of God\'s living prophet
might do so\"(meaning polygamize). And it\'s still open TODAY!! That it
just said, in so many words, that people today can practice polygamy if
it is authorized! Let me reitterate my position on polyandry. I don\'t
have a problem with it, if it\'s consentual! But when it comes to a
system engineered for a single alpha male having a stable of broodmares
that he arbitrarily controls, that isn\'t informed consent and it\'s
downright fuckin wrong! When we get deep into polygamy, we will read
some testimonies of women that were practicing it, and hopefully that
will offer some insight into the reality of polygamy. Just keep in mind
that the church never forbade polygamy, it just put it on hold for a
while\....

Joseph Smith and Plural Marriage
--------------------------------

During the era in which plural marriage was practiced, Latter-day Saints
distinguished between sealings for time and eternity and sealings for
eternity only. Sealings for time and eternity included commitments and
relationships during this life, generally including the possibility of
sexual relations. Eternity-only sealings indicated relationships in the
next life alone.

I don\'t know where the church is getting that claim from. I doubt that
the records indicate a distinction between \"time and eternity\" and
just \"eternity\" for that purpose. It may have some scribal shortcuts,
because \"eternity\" kind of includes \"time\" in it, so it\'s just
dually implicit to say \"time and eternity\" and therefore
understandable if some scribes truncated the term. That was a baseless
claim made with no evidence for or against it, at least no evidence I
have come across, it\'s merely twisting the meaning to make things look
better than they actually are. The church frequently does this when it
has to talk about the historical Joseph.

Evidence indicates that Joseph Smith participated in both types of
sealings. The exact number of women to whom he was sealed in his
lifetime is unknown because the evidence is
fragmentary.[24](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#24) Some
of the women who were sealed to Joseph Smith later testified that their
marriages were for time and eternity, while others indicated that their
relationships were for eternity
alone.[25](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#25)

Most of those sealed to Joseph Smith were between 20 and 40 years of age
at the time of their sealing to him. The oldest, Fanny Young, was 56
years old. The youngest was Helen Mar Kimball, daughter of Joseph's
close friends Heber C. and Vilate Murray Kimball, who was sealed to
Joseph several months before her 15th birthday. Marriage at such an age,
inappropriate by today's standards, was legal in that era, and some
women married in their
mid-teens.[26](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#26) Helen
Mar Kimball spoke of her sealing to Joseph as being "for eternity
alone," suggesting that the relationship did not involve sexual
relations.[27](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#27) After
Joseph's death, Helen remarried and became an articulate defender of him
and of plural marriage.

Hmmmm, they just made another factual assertion, so let\'s look at the
facts. One thing I love about examining church history is the relatively
recent nature of everything about it. We\'re still living in the same
country, under the same government, that the LDS church was birthed
under, and that doesn\'t happen with most other religions. When you have
to register your car, you must have a license, proof of insurance, proof
of ownership, and proof of current address. Once you have everything,
you have to go to a U.S. Government building in person so they can
record that you, in fact, do exist, and you are, indeed, the person that
rightfully owns the car you\'re registering. Well, I just listed one
fairly mundane task and 2 private companies and 3, possibly more,
government agencies know who you are beyond a shadow of a doubt, and
know where you live, and those records exist from that point on.

The reason I bring this up, is, even in the 1830\'s and 40\'s the
government kept really good records of simple statistics. Like the
Singulate Mean age at Marriage or SMAM. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov puts the
average marriage age for women between 22.6 and 23.4 years old. The
earliest divorce rate I could find was from the 1850\'s and it put the
average rate of divorce at 1.2 per 1000 marriages meaning that not many
old people were getting divorced and married which would skew the
marriage age statistic toward an older mean age. People were just
waiting to get married, much like they are now. And statutory laws were
going up all over the country at this time. Maryland among many other
states, started passing their individual statutory laws in 1790 making
18 the usual legal age of marriage. Obviously, American society has been
relatively conciencious of our maturing age, and by extension the
average age of our marriages, have been a social barometer often based
on how civilized any given region is, in combination with other societal
pressures. The letter said that some women married in their mid-teens,
yes some did. Some even do now, age is an interesting statistic to
analyze marriage by. What I\'m more interested in, is the point where
statistics and, legality breakdown, when one man has 40 wives and more
than one quarter of them were under 18. At what point, does a person
stop being a holy man, and starts to be classified as a serial
childfucker? Even muslims consider muhammed\'s marriage to 9 year old
Aesha a holy matrimony. So why should mormonism be any different. Even
some biblical scholars, especially Mormon ones, think Jesus had a harom
of wives that were just called his followers or \'Train\' in the bible.

The point I\'m trying to make is history is rife with religious fanatics
doing their own unique version of this. It\'s a piece we can add to the
psychological profile we\'re trying to construct around, this white-hot,
ball of charisma that is Joseph Smith. What Joe did in his lifetime,
wasn\'t new by any standards. It was unique, and apparently catchy,
because look at the size of it, but the whole thing had been done before
by many people, just like him.

Following his marriage to Louisa Beaman and before he married other
single women, Joseph Smith was sealed to a number of women who were
already
married.[29](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#29) Neither
these women nor Joseph explained much about these sealings, though
several women said they were for eternity
alone.[30](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#30) Other
women left no records, making it unknown whether their sealings were for
time and eternity or were for eternity alone.

There are several possible explanations for this practice. These
sealings may have provided a way to create an eternal bond or link
between Joseph's family and other families within the
Church.[31](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#31) These
ties extended both vertically, from parent to child, and horizontally,
from one family to another. Today such eternal bonds are achieved
through the temple marriages of individuals who are also sealed to their
own birth families, in this way linking families together. Joseph
Smith's sealings to women *already* married may have been an early
version of linking one family to another. In Nauvoo, most, if not all of
the first husbands seem to have continued living in the same household
with their wives during Joseph's lifetime, and complaints about these
sealings with Joseph Smith are virtually absent from the documentary
record (We\'ll have to take a look at that. I\'m sure SOMETHING is out
there. There has to be some dood that was pissed that Joe was gettin
frisky with already married women)

These sealings may also be explained by Joseph's reluctance to enter
plural marriage because of the sorrow it would bring to his wife Emma.

When you read D&C 132 51-57, Joe doesn\'t seem very apologetic about
things. In fact, \'The lord thy god\' kind of weighs in on a fight
between the two of them and helps Joe out of the argument. Let\'s just
read that excerpt

[]{#anchor} 51 Verily, I say unto you: A commandment I give unto mine
handmaid, Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she
stay herself and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto
her; for I did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham,
and that I might require an offering at your hand, by covenant and
sacrifice.

[]{#anchor-1} 52 And let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those
that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and
pure before me; and those who are not pure, and have said they were
pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God.

[]{#anchor-2} 53 For I am the Lord thy God, and ye shall obey my voice;
and I give unto my servant Joseph that he shall be made ruler over many
things; for he hath been faithful over a few things, and from henceforth
I will strengthen him.

[]{#anchor-3} 54 And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and
cleave unto my servant Joseph, and to none else. But if she will not
abide this commandment she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord; for I am
the Lord thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law.

[]{#anchor-4} 55 But if she will not abide this commandment, then shall
my servant Joseph do all things for her, even as he hath said; and I
will bless him and multiply him and give unto him an hundred-fold in
this world, of fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and
lands, wives and children, and crowns of eternal lives in the eternal
worlds.

[]{#anchor-5} 56 And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive my
servant Joseph his trespasses; and then shall she be forgiven her
trespasses, wherein she has trespassed against me; and I, the Lord thy
God, will bless her, and multiply her, and make her heart torejoice.

[]{#anchor-6} 57 And again, I say, let not my servant Joseph put his
property out of his hands, lest an enemy come and destroy him;
for Satanseeketh to destroy; for I am the Lord thy God, and he is my
servant; and behold, and lo, I am with him, as I was with Abraham, thy
father, even unto his exaltation and glory.

I almost wonder if this was God\'s response to Joe cheating on Emma and
their subsequent meltdown after that. He basically said from God\'s
perspective that he can fuck as many people as he wants because it\'s a
commandment of God, but Emma can\'t, even though he told her that she
could earlier. It\'s kind of hard to piece everything together, simply
based off the revelation that Joe gave, but I think a general
reconstruction, of the fight, can be summed up like that.

He may have believed that sealings to married women would comply with
the Lord's command without requiring him to have normal marriage
relationships. This could explain why, according to Lorenzo Snow, the
angel reprimanded Joseph for having "demurred" on plural marriage even
after he had entered into the
practice.[34](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#34) After
this rebuke, according to this interpretation, Joseph returned primarily
to sealings with single women. (And with married women, and with virgin
teenagers, too)

Another possibility is that, in an era when life spans were shorter than
they are today, faithful women felt an urgency to be sealed by
priesthood authority. Several of these women were married either to
non-Mormons or former Mormons, and more than one of the women later
expressed unhappiness in their present marriages. Living in a time when
divorce was difficult to obtain, these women may have believed a sealing
to Joseph Smith would give them blessings they might not otherwise
receive in the next
life.[35](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#35)

The women who united with Joseph Smith in plural marriage risked
reputation and self-respect in being associated with a principle so
foreign to their culture and so easily misunderstood by others. "I made
a greater sacrifice than to give my life," said Zina Huntington Jacobs,
"for I never anticipated again to be looked upon as an honorable woman."
Nevertheless, she wrote, "I searched the scripture & by humble prayer to
my Heavenly Father I obtained a testimony for
myself."[36](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#36) After
Joseph's death, most of the women sealed to him moved to Utah with the
Saints, remained faithful Church members, and defended both plural
marriage and Joseph.

Some of them actually became Brigham Young\'s wives, after Joe died,
probably because they had nowhere else to go. That\'s why they went to
Utah with the saints. That paragraph ended with an assertion that they
defended both plural marriage and Joseph. Of course they did, does
anybody really think that these abused women would speak out against
their cult? When has that ever happened? They would be thrown out of the
society or even possibly killed. Anybody, with any sense of self
preservation, did NOT speak out against the church or Brigham Young, or
they got a visit from Good ol\' Porter Rockwell and the Danites.

Joseph and Emma
---------------

Plural marriage was difficult for all involved. For Joseph Smith's wife
Emma, it was an excruciating ordeal. Records of Emma's reactions to
plural marriage are sparse; she left no firsthand accounts, making it
impossible to reconstruct her thoughts. Joseph and Emma loved and
respected each other deeply. After he had entered into plural marriage,
he poured out his feelings in his journal for his "beloved Emma," whom
he described as "undaunted, firm and unwavering, unchangeable,
affectionate Emma." After Joseph's death, Emma kept a lock of his hair
in a locket she wore around her neck.

I almost missed that the first two times I read this through, but her
carrying a lock of Joe\'s hair is SOOOPER occult! It could just be cute
and symbolic of him, but human hair is used in plenty of occult rites
and rituals, usually concerning a spell or a hex that has something to
do with the person whose hair it is. We know that Joe loved his occult
practices and I wouldn\'t put this past him. Let me clearify, there is
no record of this, and I\'m doing nothing but speculating here. But, I
wonder if Joe didn\'t tell Emma something vague like I\'ll always be
with you in my hair, or something like that. No, that\'s rediculous. But
we know that Joe was methodical in his occult practices to ensure their
authenticity so is it so hard to imagine that he told Emma that Joe\'s
eternity spell might not work unless she keeps some part of him with her
until she dies? We know Emma was a faithful in keeping Joe\'s secrets,
even on her death bed, so we can reasonably assume that she believed
everything Joe said. And if Joe said, that he would have to be always
with her, for her salvation to stick, that would offer reasonable
explanation of why she had the lock of hair. Maybe I\'m reading too
deeply into it, or maybe I\'m just offering a plausible alternative as
to why such a small detail, would be recorded in Mormon histroy.

Emma approved, at least for a time, of four of Joseph Smith's plural
marriages in Nauvoo, and she accepted all four of those wives into her
household. She may have approved of other marriages as well. (There were
also some that she didn\'t approve of, which was manifest by her making
some of the girls lives a living hell, once they moved in) But Emma
likely did not know about all of Joseph's
sealings.[40](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#40) She
vacillated in her view of plural marriage, at some points supporting it
and at other times denouncing it.

In the summer of 1843, Joseph Smith dictated the revelation on marriage,
a lengthy and complex text containing both glorious promises and stern
warnings, some directed at
Emma.[41](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#41) The
revelation instructed women and men that they must obey God's law and
commands in order to receive the fulness of His glory. (D&C 132, which
we\'ll read in it\'s entirety to kick off the full polygamy episodes)

The revelation on marriage required that a wife give her consent before
her husband could enter into plural
marriage.[42](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#42) Nevertheless,
toward the end of the revelation, the Lord said that if the first wife
"receive not this law"---the command to practice plural marriage---the
husband would be "exempt from the law of Sarah," presumably the
requirement that the husband gain the consent of the first wife before
marrying additional
women.[43](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#43) After
Emma opposed plural marriage, Joseph was placed in an agonizing dilemma,
forced to choose between the will of God and the will of his beloved
Emma. He may have thought Emma's rejection of plural marriage exempted
him from the law of Sarah. Her decision to "receive not this law"
permitted him to marry additional wives without her consent. Because of
Joseph's early death and Emma's decision to remain in Nauvoo and not
discuss plural marriage after the Church moved west, many aspects of
their story remain known only to the two of them.

That\'s why I was trying to reconstruct the fight Joe and Emma had about
polygamy using D&C 132. A lot of good information can be easily
ascertained upon rigid examination and a little inference.

Trial and Spiritual Witness
---------------------------

Years later in Utah, participants in Nauvoo plural marriage discussed
their motives for entering into the practice. God declared in the Book
of Mormon that monogamy was the standard; at times, however, He
commanded plural marriage so His people could "raise up seed unto
\[Him\]."[44](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#44) Plural
marriage did result in an increased number of children born to believing
parents. (Uh, yea. The catholic church has long since proven that big
families tend to follow the same religion and perpetuate more members by
sheer breeding force. Now add in the polygamy lifestyle, and you boost
numbers like Enron did)

Some Saints also saw plural marriage as a redemptive process of
sacrifice and spiritual refinement. According to Helen Mar Kimball,
Joseph Smith stated that "the practice of this principle would be the
hardest trial the Saints would ever have to test their faith." Though it
was one of the "severest" trials of her life, she testified that it had
also been "one of the greatest
blessings."[46](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#46) Her
father, Heber C. Kimball, agreed. "I never felt more sorrowful," he said
of the moment he learned of plural marriage in 1841. "I wept days. ... I
had a good wife. I was
satisfied."[47](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#47)

The decision to accept such a wrenching trial usually came only after
earnest prayer and intense soul-searching. Brigham Young said that, upon
learning of plural marriage, "it was the first time in my life that I
had desired the
grave."[48](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#48) "I
had to pray unceasingly," he said, "and I had to exercise faith and the
Lord revealed to me the truth of it and that satisfied me." (Bloody
Brigham does tend to play a bit of a historical victim, which is made
apparent throughout some of his writings. God commands polygamy, and he
doesn\'t want to do it, but he does it anyway, because that\'s what god
wants. Just like he didn\'t really want to kill 120 men, women,
children, and BABIES, that were just passersby, and steal all their
stuff, and THEN, send a bill to the government for having to deal with
the situation, but he did because it\'s what God would have wanted. Holy
fuck I cannot WAIT to talk about the Mountain Meadows Massacre) Heber C.
Kimball found comfort only after his wife Vilate had a visionary
experience attesting to the rightness of plural marriage. "She told me,"
Vilate's daughter later recalled, "she never saw so happy a man as
father was when she described the vision and told him she was satisfied
and knew it was from
God."[50](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#50)

Lucy Walker recalled her inner turmoil when Joseph Smith invited her to
become his wife. "Every feeling of my soul revolted against it," she
wrote. Yet, after several restless nights on her knees in prayer, she
found relief as her room "filled with a holy influence" akin to
"brilliant sunshine." She said, "My soul was filled with a calm sweet
peace that I never knew," and "supreme happiness took possession of my
whole being." (Okay, imma be immature for a second here, but that was
some 50 shades of grey shit right there, \'Filled with a holy
influence\'? \'supreme happines took possession of my whole being\'??!!
That doesn\'t sound like normal Mormon speak to me, but I guess times
are different now. If LDS women talked like that these days, the church
would attract a whole new generation of beavis and butthead mentality
guys, laughing at all the inuendo!! Digression over)

Not all had such experiences. Some Latter-day Saints rejected the
principle of plural marriage and left the Church, while others declined
to enter the practice but remained
faithful.[52](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#52)Nevertheless,
for many women and men, initial revulsion and anguish was followed by
struggle, resolution, and ultimately, light and peace. Sacred
experiences enabled the Saints to move forward in
faith.[53](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#53)

Conclusion
----------

The challenge of introducing a principle as controversial as plural
marriage is almost impossible to overstate. A spiritual witness of its
truthfulness allowed Joseph Smith and other Latter-day Saints to accept
this principle. Difficult as it was, the introduction of plural marriage
in Nauvoo did indeed "raise up seed" unto God. A substantial number of
today's members descend through faithful Latter-day Saints who practiced
plural marriage.

Church members no longer practice plural
marriage.[54](https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng#54) Consistent
with Joseph Smith's teachings, the Church permits a man whose wife has
died to be sealed to another woman when he remarries. Moreover, members
are permitted to perform ordinances on behalf of deceased men and women
who married more than once on earth, sealing them to all of the spouses
to whom they were legally married. The precise nature of these
relationships in the next life is not known, and many family
relationships will be sorted out in the life to come. Latter-day Saints
are encouraged to trust in our wise Heavenly Father, who loves His
children and does all things for their growth and salvation.

So, that was the end. That was the essay that sparked so much PR
controversy for the church.

I often say, when I\'m doing this research, that the worst thing for the
LDS church is Joseph Smith. You see, most cult-like empires that have
been created in the past, die with the person that created the cult in
the first place. But, once in a while, you come accross one that was
organized well enough, that it can\'t help but perpetuate through the
remaining members, once the founder dies, or looses a gunfight like in
Joe\'s case. Plenty of examples exist of one person rising to power, but
their tenure at the top of their newly created empire, doesn\'t always
last long enough for the structure of the cult to keep everything
together.

In this respect, the LDS church has excelled where most have failed. All
along the way, Joe was setting up an entire hierarchy to run the finer
points of the administration. Not only that, but the power of prophet
and chief executive, passes on to the next person in line as part of the
doctrine. I remember hearing a story of some more recent prophet lying
in the hospital about to die, and as soon as he did, one of the apostles
looked to the most senior apostle, and said something along the lines of
\"What would the new prophet have us do?\" There is literally no down
time from one leader to the next, which has proved to be a successful
power structure for almost 185 years now. Where other governing bodies
usually die during power transition, the church doesn\'t have to deal
with any of that confusing period of down time. I think this is a small
key to why it has been so successful for so long, and power struggles
are unheard of in the church today. Joe did a great job of setting this
thing up for success, but he was still a man with alpha male urges and
tendencies. So while the church tells Joe\'s story like he was a pious
seer with an unfiltered pipeline to God\'s will, the truth of what he
really was seems to shine through, and the church is having a harder and
harder time hiding it from the prying curiousity of the internet using
public.

The true character of Joe will be revealed throughout our journey into
the history of the church, and everything he did, can\'t be concealed by
the church\'s, watered down, PR friendly historical analysis anymore. I
hope you will join me as we continue on with the history of the church
in coming episodes. Next episode is all about David Whitmer, just like
planned, and then the narrative will be taking off. Talk at ya next time
on the NAMO Podcast.
