---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 5 - Introduction to Oliver Cowdery (Cowdung-Ollover)
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-5-introduction-oliver-cowdery-cowdung-ollover/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep5-oliver-cowdery-cowdung-allover-and-joes-mutual-bapturbation-ritual
libsyn_embed: 3169153
redirect_from: /2014/11/09/ep-5-introduction-to-oliver-cowdery-cowdung-ollover/

category: History
date: 2014-11-08 18:39:07 PST
---

Hello,

Welcome to the Naked Mormonism podcast, my name is Bryce Blankenagel and
thank you for joining me. Here, we study the history of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (or LDS Church). Not the sugar coated
PR friendly history that the church itself teaches, but the real history
so we can know where it really came from, and compare it to the current
teachings of the church. I'm looking to build a body of knowledge,
hopefully with your help, about the LDS church in it's factual entirety
so listeners can understand what this thing really is. I also want to
call out Oliver Cowdery on his devilishly seductive countenance, lies of
omission, and fuckwitted divination, so if any of that offended you,
then you should either shut it off, or, open your mind, give it a listen
and try to reconcile why the facts offend you.

Welcome back, the last couple of weeks we have been studying Martin
Harris, aka NSSM. We found out he was a visionary man that was highly
susceptable to the power of suggestion from on high. We watched him get
swindled out of his money for the print of the BOM, get in fights with
his wife about money during which he beat the hell out of her multiple
times and kicked her out of his house. We watched his marriage spiral
into divorce after an affair with the neighbors wife which he didn't
even try to hide from his wife, Lucy, and that was pretty much where we
left off. 

While there is a lot more to cover when it comes to Marty, we can't get
too caught up in it for now. We will see his character develop more and
more as the timeline continues, but if we keep going with him, we
advance the timeline past other much more prominent character
introductions, and that is unacceptable. So, we'll close off the Marty
line for now in an effort to examine the next big hitter in the
foundation of the church. Oliver Cowdery or as we'll come to know him,
Cowdung Allover, or just Cowdung for short...

Before we talk about Cowdung himself, we need to bring up a whole new
subject as it offers some background on the connection between the
Cowdery family and the Smith family. We will set our scene in Southwest
VT in the 1790's. Our focus momentarily lies on a radical Zionist sect
called 'The New Isrealites' which was founded by Nathaniel Wood in
Rutland, VT. This is from wikipedia: Wood declared his followers "modern
Israelites," and the group practiced a strict dietary code as they
understood to be instructed in theÂ [Law of
Moses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_Moses). Like most radical
sects, the group displayed spiritual gifts and made prophecies. At one
point the group began building a temple, although the project was
eventually abandoned. They also believed in speaking in the angelic
tongue which meant babbling what they thought was "ancient hebrew". They
engaged in polygamy, using dowsing rods to hunt for treasure, and
divination to recieve divine revelation.... Seem familiar? Well, William
Cowdery, Cowdung 's dad, and Big Daddy Cheese, Joseph Smith's dad, were
both members of this radical sect. In fact Big Daddy Cheese was one of
the 'leading rods-men' in the sect, meaning people there looked up to
him because, somehow, his magic vision was better than everybody else's
magic vision. He may have even taught William Cowdery a thing or two in
the world of scrying while they were out hunting for treasure in this
cult. 

So what does this connection mean?First off, Lucy Mack Smith, Joe's
Mother was third cousins with Cowdung. Lucy, and Big Daddy Cheese didn't
even know each other before this time, as they would be married in 1796.
However, Lucy was living a mere 50 miles away in the same small town as
William Cowdery's uncle and Big Daddy Chese. It isn't necessarily
documented this way, partly because so few documents exist during this
time, but I believe that William Cowdery set up Lucy Mack and Big Daddy
Cheese on one of their dowsing outings near Turnbridge Vermont where
they was living. It is documented however that the Smiths and the
Cowderys both attended a congressional church in Poultney Vermont after
this radical sect broke up in 1802.

All of that information may seem insignificant at the moment, but
eventually it will matter when it comes to the authorship of the BOM. So
now that we have established an initial connection between the Smith's
and Cowdery's let's talk about the man of the hour.

Cowdung Allover was born on October 3, 1806, so he was just barely a
year younger than Joseph Smith. He was born in Wells, Vermont to William
and Rebecca Fuller Cowdery, into a family of 8 siblings at the time. His
mother, Rebecca, died when Cowdung was just 2 leaving the family
traumatized and motherless. Luckily, William was q uick on the rebound
and married a widow by the name of Keziah Pierce who had a son of her
own at the time. She had been married to her husband, previous to
William, for 3 years and he died soon after the birth of their first and
only son, so this was a widow-widower match made in untimely spouse
death hell I suppose. The new happy couple had 3 more kids while the
oldest kids were periodically moving away to be on their own, and this
is where the story of Cowdung comes to fruition.

Cowdung Allover was a very bright young child, who reportedly began
going to school in 1813. While it may not have been a formal schooling,
it was at very least a literary-heavy apprenticeship that he used the
knowledge from later on in his life. He eventually landed a couple of
jobs in NY as a typesetter in a couple of printing presses for some
quick cash, that was during the years 1822-1824. He was known to be
quite charismatic, as well as intelligent and steeped in the bible
during his prime years.

It can be speculated that Cowdung spent some time living in the Smith
household during his time typesetting. The speculation is drawn from the
fact that his parents were very possibly familiar with the Smiths, prior
to his time as a typesetter, and that Cowdung was working in
Canandaigua, Ontario, NY which was less than 10 miles from where the
Smith family lived at this time. I believe that Joe and Cowdung became
quite well acquianted at this time even though there isn't any
documentation explicitly detailing interactions between the two.

But the thing that is most intriguing, is Cowdung's job previous to
typesetting in NY. Before he moved to Canandaigua, he was living in
Poultney, VT with his family and working as a printer's devil/assistant
typesetter at a company called the Poultney Gazette. The Poultney
Gazette was a fairly successful printing/publishing company that had
recently taken a job from a Minister named Ethan Smith, to publish a
book he had recently written. The book was called View of the Hebrews,
and there is strong evidence that Cowdung was one of the workers at the
press during the time it was published. 

I can't really get into the rabbit hole of View of the Hebrews as it
will be a large discussion by itself in a soon to come episode, beside's
the fact that it would derail the whole Cowdung Allover subject, which
is much more important right now. But what you need to know right now,
is Ethan Smith published View of the Hebrews in 1823 which is a book
detailing the origins of the native americans as having emmigrated from
Isreal. Not only that, but Ethan Smith was also the Minister for the
Cowdery's church at the time, and had been for two years prior. Quite
soon after the book was published, Cowdung moved to Canadaigua, NY, in
the late 1823, and here is where our story continues.

Cowdung Allover was typesetter in the burned-over district in NY through
1824. We brushed over this when we talked about Joseph Smith, but just
to recap, this was a time of constant religious awakenings and revivals.
Luckily, for local publishing companies, all the religous sects that
were cropping up, had information they needed printed and distributed.
In those days, if a typesetter wasn't making enough money at his job, he
could supplement his income, by taking small payments from the people
who were paying to publish documents, and distributing them for a small
fee. This was also a great way to meet a lot of people and get your name
and profession out there. They didn't exactly have monster.com so
networking was a much more arduous and time consuming task.

Well, that's what Cowdung did. He made a comission from selling
religious pamphlets and books to people, not only in NY, but also south
to Pennsylvania and west to Ohio. One of the main areas Cowdung may have
spent time in was Pittsburgh, as it was a burgening city and trading hub
connecting the east coast to the currently settling Ohio. Sidney Rigdon
was the Pastor of the First Baptist Church in Pittsburgh when Cowdung
would have been visiting the city's holy folk to distribute Jesus
Propoganda.

I just mentioned a name for the first time, Sidney Rigdon. This
guy...... I should be doing the entire podcast about just him, because
he almost plays a larger role than Joe in the foundation of the church.
But alas, the podcast is about Mormonism in general so I will have to
reserve talking about him until the time is right. All we need to
understand now is Cowdung very possibly met this man, Sidney Rigdon, in
Pittsburgh around 1824-1825. Not to mention that Erastus, Cowdung's
older brother, lived a mere 9 miles away from Rigdon from 1820-1822,
probably attending the same church as Rigdon, illustrating another
possible connection between the Cowdung and Sidney Rigdon.

Rigdon aside, let's continue talking about Cowdung. After his job as a
printer/distributor of Jesus papers, he kind of floated around for a
year attending multiple religious revivals in Palmyra. It's highly
likely that Joe was attending a lot of these as well which is something
I will provide evidence for when we get into the authorship of the BOM.
It was also possible that Sidney Rigdon was at some of these revivals
because he was gaining some notoriety in the area for his pastoral
works, and with the opening of the Erie Canal, Pittsburgh, where Rigdon
was living, and Palmyra, near where Joe was living at the time, were
barely two days of travel apart giving Sidney, Cowdung and Joe
relatively easy access to each other.

Cowdung must have ran short on cash because his time of jobless
spiritual seeking was overturned by the need for a living, so he
allegedly worked to prepare a printers manuscript, for a man by the name
of William Morgan in late 1825 to mid 1826 at the Batavia Advocate.
William Morgan was an author who was trying to publish a book that
revealed a lot of the secrets of Free Masonry entitled 'Illustrations of
Masonry'. It's very possible that Cowdung introduced Joe and William to
each other around this time as he was possibly becoming well acquainted
with both of them. This connection will come to play a part much later
with Joe, so tuck it in the back of your mind for now.

The Mason's in the area must not have liked this William Morgan
character, and the slander he was trying to print, because he was
arrested on September 11, 1826, and went missing 8 days later. His body
was never discovered, but what happened, isn't much of a mystery,
especially because the Batavia Advocate was burned to the ground while
it was printing the book, in August, before William was arrested. So the
Masons had a pretty powerful influence at the time if they took a man
from state custody and just made him disappear. 

That being said, Cowdung learned everything there was to know about the
Masons during his time working for William Morgan. Preparing a printers
copy of a book is a very arduous task. The typesetter must read every
single line multiple times to proof-read and eliminate any errors the
author may not have already caught. So, Cowdung not only knew what was
in this book, but he also had to talk with the author on a daily
occasion to make sure he wasn't changing the context of anything the
book contained. 

While this seems like a moot point to anybody that doesn't know the true
history of the church, it does come to play a massive role later on. In
my introductory episode, I listed a bunch of things that Joseph was, as
quoted by D. Michael Quinn, one of those points was '(Joseph) was an
anti-mason turned master mason'. The similarities between Free Masonry
and The LDS Church are absolutely unbelievable, but that isn't something
we can dive into just yet, as it will be an episode all by itself.

Anyway, so this William Morgan guy probably gets his throat cut and
dropped in the river and Cowdung is out of work. So in late 1826, early
1827 Cowdung goes to work as a lowly store clerk making barely minimum
wage at the time. He probably went from 12 cents an hour to 7 cents an
hour or something to that effect.

Anybody that goes from a think tank position like editor to a cashier at
a store doesn't want to stay there long, and this is what happened to
Cowdung. The Manchester NY school board of trustee's needed a
schoolmaster position filled. Conveniently enough, Hyrum Smith, Joe's
brother and bestest buddy, was on the board of trustee's. Originally,
Lyman Cowdery, Cowdung's brother, was offered the position. He
reportedly accepted the position but then immediately declined in lieu
of Cowdung taking over the position, and that is exactly what happened.
Cowdung became Schoolmaster in late 1828 at which time he moved in with
the Smith family.

When I say the Smith family, I only mean Lucy, Big Daddy Cheese, and the
remaining siblings at home, Joe and Emma were living in Pennsylvania
during this time. But, while Cowdung Allover is staying in their home,
Big Daddy Cheese takes this lovely opportunity to tell Cowdung all about
the plates. 

Once Cowdung learns all about this book he reporteldly asks the lord if
this is the work he should have Cowdung do, and we can speculate that he
received a positive answer. During the time Cowdung was staying with the
Smith family, Joe acutally visited home. He was in Pennsylvania with his
new wife trying to translate with some makeshift scribes, but decided on
a whim to come visit home while Cowdung was staying there. This was
arguably the occasion that Lucy Smith, Joe's Mom, asked Abigail Harris,
Marty's cousin for some money so Joe could take the coach home to visit.
We talked about that in episode 3 before we read Lucy, Marty's wife's,
testimony on the situation, and while there is no documentation directly
backing that connection up, the timeline does fit perfectly.

I want to interject my own understanding of the situation here, because
we have been slogging through a lot of information and there are a lot
of conclusions that can be drawn up to this point. The reported church
history has Cowdung entering right here with no prior mention. They
merely report that he was a school teacher looking for his true calling
in life. When I was doing the research for this episode, I watched a
clip from the Joseph Smith movie that is currently playing in the Joseph
Smith center in Salt Lake City. The clip illustrated Cowdung approaching
Big Daddy Cheese out of the blue and asking him about the work Joe is up
to. Big Daddy Cheese tells him that Joe is doing Gods work, translating
an ancient record, and is in need of a scribe. Cowdung tells Daddy
Cheese that he feels like God has impressed it upon his soul, that this
should be his calling in the restoration of the true gospel. And Big
DaddyCheese responds with if this is truly what the Lord wants for you,
he will make in known, and then it pretty much just cuts to Cowdung
praying in his room. 

After the scene in the room, the movie sort of ambles towards a scene
that shows Cowdung approaching Joe out of the blue, saying the Lord has
told me that I should serve as your scribe. This seems to be completely
unfounded, I mean if some random guy walking in the desert shows up to
the mouth of the cave Muhammed is in when he's trippin balls and
revelating the Qu'ran into existence, and that weird motherfucker says
'Hey you need any help in there??\!\!' I kinda doubt Muhammed would've
just said 'ok come write down some of this crazy shit that's falling out
of my mouth'. But in the movie, after Cowdung approaches Joe, the next
scene has them both sitting at a table with the plates out in plain
sight and Joe says 'alright, I think that is enough for today'. The
church film says nothing about Lucy Smith and Cowdung being
3<sup>rd</sup> cousins and seems to actively report that Cowdung and Joe
didn't know each other until early April 1829, when this scene
transpires. 

But what of all this previous history that the Cowdery and the Smith
family had together? We have record of the two families being in close
proximity on multiple occasions during Joe and Cowdung's upbringing, and
the two families even attended the same church for a time. Additionally,
the fathers of the families were in the same scrying and divination cult
for a little while, Big Daddy Cheese was even revered as a bit of a
higher up in the cult because his dowsing and scrying were so accurate
allegedly. 

Cowdung and Joe may have even attended some of the same religious
revivals in Palmyra and Rochester in their late teens-early twenties.
They have plenty more meetings that we can speculate on but can't
necessarily prove as fact, but why would the church divorce Joe and
Cowdung prior to 1829? I would offer that it's because something is
being disguised.

Now I don't want to sound like a conspiracy theorist here, so hear me
out. Since the beginning of this episode, I have tried to provide enough
evidence to show that there were multiple times that Cowdung and Joe
could have come together for collusion at some level. And let's consider
the evidence for and against Joe's access to the book, 'View of the
Hebrews'. I plan on showing, in later episodes, a strong correlation
between the content of View of the Hebrews and the BOM but let's just
consider the basic storyline. 

Ethan Smith wrote about the lost tribes of Isreal being the primary
ancestors of the Native Americans as well as dozens of other
similarities when his book and the book of mormon are juxtaposed. But
his book was published in 1823, and it was even underwent a second
edition of print, meaning it was quite a popular book in the whole
northeast region. 

My point is, I believe Cowdung knew Joe, and might have even given him
the book by Ethan Smith. But, just in case he didn't, it seems like 'The
View of the Hebrews' was made available to most consumers by mid 1823
giving Joe 4 years, until he started translating, to read it and
synthesize his own story from its pages.

So maybe Joe did receive divine revelation, about an idea that was
fairly popular around the area at the time. In fact, Joe announced he
had received revelation from God about the ancient inhabitants of this
continent a mere 101 days after the release of the View of the Hebrews.
That seems oddly coincidental, doesn't it?

Remember how I mentioned earlier that the church today teaches that Joe
and Cowdung didn't know each other, whatsoever, before they officially
met and started translating in 1829? Let's answer why that is....
Because that's what Joe and Cowdung Claim. Let me tell you what I mean;
this is straight from the LDS.org website

<span id="anchor"></span>After Joseph Smith allowed Martin Harris to
take the 116 Book of Mormon manuscript pages, which Martin lost, the
plates and Josephâs gift to translate were taken from him. After
repenting and humbling himself in prayer, the plates were returned to
him with a promise that someone would come to help him with the
translation.

<span id="anchor-1"></span>On the 5th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery
came to my house. â¦ He stated to me that \[while\] teaching school in
the neighborhood where my father resided, â¦ \[my\] family related to him
the circumstance of my having received the plates, and accordingly he
had come to make inquiries of me. Two days after the arrival of Mr.
Cowdery â¦ I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to
write for me.

There is no mention of them making acquaintences any time before then,
nothing about the same bloodline, nothing. Let's hear what Cowdung has
to say about April 5<sup>th</sup> 1829.

"This was the afternoon when my natural eyes, for the first time beheld
this brother\[Joseph Smith, Jr\]..." at the Isaac Hale farm in Harmony,
Susquehanna, PA. 

Now, I'm not a parent, but I remember being a kid. If my parents asked
if I did something wrong I would say 'No mom I didn't throw the cat down
the stairs', and they would know to check the cat for broken bones. In
much the same way, during the Emma interview in episode 2, remember this
question? 

Question. What about the revelation on polygamy? Did Joseph Smith have
anything like it? What of spiritual wifery?  
Answer. There was no revelation on either polygamy or spiritual wives.
There were some rumors of something of the sort, of which I asked my
husband. He assured me that all there was of it was, that, in a chat
about plural wives, he had said, "Well, such a system might possibly be,
if everybody was agreed to it, and would behave as they should; but they
would not; and besides, it was contrary to the will of heaven." No such
thing as polygamy or spiritual wifery was taught, publicly or privately,
before my husband's death, that I have now, or ever had any knowledge
of.

And we know for a fact that, both mormons and non-mormons, were well
aware that mormons were a very sexually open community at this time.
This is bold-faced denial and it's completely cardboard. I believe that
Joe and Cowdung were doing the same thing about their relationship prior
to translation.

The simple fact that Cowdung's old pastor was the author of View of the
Hebrews, was a damning enough connection that Joe and Cowdung didn't
want the general populus making that connection. If somebody in that day
could prove that the BOM was plagerised from the View of the Hebrews, it
would be the death of the early Mormon church. But, most people in that
time would perhaps buy one book a year. Apparently, not enough people
read the books side by side to compare, because not a single person
today has heard of the View of the Hebrews unless they are studying
anti-mormon literature... Whereas, for some reason, most people in
technology driven today's society have at very least heard of the
Mormons and their special bible, even if it was just in reference to
good ol' Mitt Romney. Unfortunately for Ethan Smith, he wasn't radical
or polarizing enough, nor was his book, to get the worlds attention, but
Joe and the BOM were, and here we are today, 185 years later trying to
debunk the most capitalistic new world religion in all it's festering
glory.

All I can say is look at the evidence and see if you come to the same
conclusion that I do. Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith knew all along
what the source material for the BOM would be and they never thought
enough people would have read the View of the Hebrews to call them out
on their plagerism. So Joe and Cowdung cooked up a new version with
enough original content to obscure the origin of the storyline. That is
the conclusion that follows the facts and doesn't require divine
revelation from God to explain the authorship of the BOM, in the way the
'gold plates' version of the story does.

Let's look at somemore evidence. Joe and Emma had recently married, and
NSSM had paid to move them to Emma's parent's house. They later moved
into their own small cabin on an adjacent property to the Hale's house,
and it's here, in this cabin in Harmony PA, that Cowdung became the
chief scribe for Joe. It's a good thing that Cowdung knew how to read
and write at a professional level, because the translation up to that
point had been trudging along at about a half to one page per day.
Slower than cold shit on a winter morning. When Cowdung came to live
with Joe and Emma, they were suddenly translating 5-8 pages per day.
That slow winter morning shit just became angry mexican food shit, and
the BOM was 'translated' aka authored in about 2 months once Cowdung
came along. 

Cowdung and Joe reportedly began their translation, after the account of
Lehi, which was the lost 116 pages. What I mean is, they started part
way through, after where Joe had translated with NSSM, then went all the
way to the end. After they were done, they went back and translated the
account of Nephi which became the replacement for the lost 116 pages at
the very end of their time translating. I believe they did this to make
the story of Lehi, which Marty and Joe translated, fit in with the rest
of the narrative. Also, they were probably trying to gain their
collective writing style so it could be consistent when they did
re-write Lehi into Nephi from Joe's memory. 

It's really hard to try and paint a picture of exactly how the BOM was
getting translated at this time, however we do know a few things. One,
Joe had Cowdung and David Whitmer as scribes during this time. I know
that we haven't talked about David Whitmer much, but next episode will
be all about him. We'll do a similar analysis of him that we've done of
Cowdung for this episode, and we will find out how he fits into the
authorship of the BOM.

But back to the translation, the second thing we know about it, is the
speed of translation greatly increased when Cowdung and David came to
help Joe scribe. Up to this point, Emma, her brother, and Joe's brother,
Hyrum, were scribes, and the translation was not going fast enough. Once
the dream team came in, they wrote 350 some pages in a roughly 60 day
period. This sudden burst of inspiration in the translation has to be
explained somehow. A believing mormon might say, that Joe just had to be
rightous enough to receive the proper scribes that were truly called of
God. Or that it was all part of God's plan because he works in
mysterious ways and whatnot. I don't think so.... In my opinion, Joe
finally had the wingmen he needed to bust out a working copy of the BOM.
He needed some people that could keep up with his wit and imagination,
and also believed all the same crazy shit he did, and that is exactly
what he found in Cowdung and David Whitmer.

And thirdly, Martin Harris wasn't involved at all with the translation
at this point, however, he was bank-rolling the whole thing and even
gave Joe and Emma some money to cover living expenses while Joe was
translating in lieu of working. This may only seem like free-loading
now, but when it comes time for Marty to throw the farm in hock for the
printing fee, this becomes a bit of an issue. This issue, barely gets
resolved using the other 10 witnesses of the plates, which Marty becomes
convinced with, and follows through with funding the print of the BOM.

Alright, onto the next topic with respect to Cowdung and Joe. Earlier we
read from the Joseph Smith History about them starting the translation
on April 7<sup>th</sup> 1829, well there is a bit more after it that I
think is worth reading.

JSH 1:68-72

Basically, that just detailed an account of how the priesthood was
restored to the earth. For listeners unfamiliar with the mormon jargon
of 'priesthood', it doesn't mean being a member of the church hiearchy.
The priesthood is something that every twelve year old gets in the
church, that's the Aaronic priesthood anyway. That's the priesthood that
we have explicit detail, from the JSH, of the angel of John the baptist
conferring it on Joe and Cowdung.

However, we don't really have this level of detail when it comes to the
Melchizedek priesthood being restored. The M Priesthod is the one that
young men usually receive when they turn 18. The year from 18 to 19 in
the Mormon church used to be a year of intense spiritual and monetary
preparation for young men about to turn missionary, that was until
recently when the missionary age was lowered to 18. But one big part of
the preparation, is recieving the M priesthood so you can do all the
ordinances necessary while on your mission. That was just an explanatory
sidenote about the 2 different levels of priesthood in the Mormon
church, the Aaronic and Melchizedek. The only thing we know about the
restoration of the M priesthood, is Joe recorded that he and Cowdung
would be ordained with it later, which most historians assume to be
within the following 2 weeks after they received the Aaronic and
baptized each other. Once again we run into some problems with the
claims being made. I'm going to string out a series of quotes from
people you may or may not recognize, but I'll summarize it after.

This is David Whitmer in an interview with Zenas H. Gurly in 1885

<span id="anchor-2"></span>

|  |
|  |
|  |

That really couldn't have been much more clear. Earlier than this
interview, Orson Pratt asked David Whitmer in an 1878 interview if he
could recall the details of the bestowel of the apostleship on Joe and
Cowdung by the apostles Peter, James, and John, he said

"I do not know, Joseph never told me. I can only tell you what I know,
for I will not testify to anything I do not know." A little emphatic
wasn't he? And that was from David Whitmer, one of the 3 witnesses of
the plates who had also been ordained an apostle with the Melchizedek
priesthood, HE DIDN'T EVEN KNOW THE ORIGINS OF IT\!

This was a letter written by Edward Stevenson to apostle Franklin D.
Richards, and is cited in "Stevenson Family History" 1955 by Joseph
Grant Stevenson. The letter is kind of long but I will only be
highlighting the important parts and including other points that help to
tie the storyline together.

"Dear Brother F.D. Richards, I take pleasure in addressing a few lines
to you. My journey to this place has been attended with blessings. 

I called on David Whitmer soon after breakfast at the Huggins House and
spent until 2 PM. I took dinner with David, and his only son, David, and
a son of one of the eight witnesses, by name of Page.

David seemed quite pleased to receive me, and asked me to ask a blessing
on the food. Of course he bore a very strong testimony; and although
very feeble in body, he was talkative; but said many things were not to
go out to the world, that he talked about. UGH\! I wish I could have
been a fly on the wall for that conversation\!

He said the 'signs of the time' to him indicated great events. He has no
sympathy with the 'Josephites' or others."

The term 'Josephites' probably doesn't make a lot of sense right now,
but when we cover the breakup of all the factions of mormonism, that
will have a little more context.

It continues "I enquired of David and young David; also of Philander A.
Page, aged 54, son of Hiram Page, one of the eight witnesses; also John
\[Whitmer\], in whose hands the records are; all (and separately) who
say that they do not have any knowledge of, neither do the records show,
concerning Peter, James, and John's coming to the Prophet Joseph. On
this and also on the John the Baptist's mission, they seem, all of them,
very ignorant. David said the Prophet of God received the command from
God, and that was sufficient authority. He did not seem to understand
the necessity of the connecting link of ordination. 

They are very dark on the subject of the sealing power as also baptism
for the dead." When he says sealing and baptisms for the dead, he is
referring to currently practiced Mormon rituals performed inside mormon
temples, apparently everybody here was completely ignorant on both of
those subjects even though they were supposedly founding doctrines of
the church. This all hearkens to the splitting of the various factions
before and after Joe died, because, remember this interview was in 1878,
34 years after Joe died.

The letter continues, "He showed me again the manuscript and the copy of
the characters of the plates as copied, and says they are the identical
ones taken by Martin to Prof. Anthon." This just affirmed that, the
caractors manuscript we talked about last episode, was indeed authentic.

The letter goes on to describe David Whitmer being nearly on his death
bed for this interview, which we will probably finish covering next
episode when we actually talk about David. 

The next person I'm going to quote is William E. McLellin, he was an
early convert to the church in 1831, but he later became one of the
original 12 apostles in 1835, and was excommunicated in 1838 for
blaspheming against church leaders. This is in "An insiders view of
mormon origins" by Grant palmer on page 244.

"I joined the church in 1831. For years I have never heard of John the
Baptist ordaining Joseph and Oliver. I heard not of James, Peter, and
John doing so. I heard Joseph tell his experience of his ordination, by
Cowdery, and the organization of the church, probably more than twenty
times, to persons who, near the rise of the church, wished to know and
hear about it. I never heard of Moroni, John, or Peter, James and John
at the ordination till it was told some years later afterward in Ohio."
He was later quoted saying "altho I carefully noticed things that were
said, today I do not believe the story."

Well, we have two sides to the story of how the priesthood authority was
bestowed on the founding members of the church. We have Joe claiming
that he and Cowdung recieved the Aaronic priesthood from John the
baptist, and following that ordination, Joe and Cowdung baptized each
other. Some unknown and unrecorded time after that, believed to be
within the following two weeks, Joe and Cowdung received the Holy
Melchizedek priesthood and began to set up the church with the proper
keys and authority.

On the flip side, we don't have a single other record substantiating
Joe's claim. But, we do have a lot of claims from multiple people saying
the opposite. We have 6 people claiming that Joe fabricated the story
later on, which seems to comport with the available evidence. 

But why would Joe do this? We can't be sure, but I can surely guess.....
I would argue that Joe was flying by the seat of his pants when the
church was first founded. He didn't even form the apostleship until 4
years after the first meeting of the church in 1830. I bet there were
power struggles going on. Joe was slowly gaining more and more followers
which all had different opinions of how they thought the church would
be, so, probably in a panic, Joe said there needs to be 12 apostles in
the church all ordained with the highest priesthood. Everybody else just
had to shut up and deal with what the twelve apostles and prophet had to
say. Oh and the only way that someone could be an apostle is if Joe said
they could. When the lower elders, that had just been uprooted,
invariably asked why did they just get arbitrarily demoted? Joe dropped
a revalation on their face and came up with a story of an angel
ordaining him, and Cowdung, with the super-dee-duper special fairy dust,
while they were translating the BOM. Nobody could refute it and it was
an order that came from the prophet, so everybody had to either accept
it or they were exiled for heresy.

This is something that a theocratic tyrant personality type would do.
Now I'm not saying that 'tyrant' isn't God's calling card because it
perfectly describes the God of the Bible, but I am saying that doesn't
really seem like revelation from on high, nor is it similar to any of
the prophets of the bible. Jesus was the only Holy person in the bible
that ever had a hierarchy structured following. For the most part, the
other prophets in the bible are considered outcasts, or unilateral
leaders of groups that are outcasts. Does this seem like a revelation
consistent with the God of the bible. I don't think so, primarily
because Joseph Smith fits so perfectly into the cult leader persona,
much like Jesus himself, even without the influences of Yahweh. So I
have to wonder, did it hurt when Joe revelated all of the stuff about
the priesthood and apostles out of his ass in 1834? Or was his asshole
so accustomed to having things like this ripped out of it day after day,
for years, that it just didn't care anymore? Try asking a missionary
that question....

We are going to do an entire episode on just the restoration of the
priesthood, but for now, what can we glean from all of this? You know,
I'm not really sure.... We have only been introduced to a small handful
of characters in this massive story so far, and we've only spent a
single episode on the founding prophet himself. Our narrative basically
halted after episode one when Joe pulled the plates from the ground.
After that we only talked about the next three integral characters that
play a big part in the authorship of the BOM.

Let's review the important characters, aside from Joseph Smith himself,
up to this point. In episode 2 we talked about his wife, the lovely
Emma. She is tall, suave, and very mild and will later come to be known
as Sister Emma, and then Mother Emma after that, both, for her formative
role in a split off faction of Mormonism, and because of her maternal
attitude towards the saints in the towns they lived in. She obviously
cared for people and loved humanity so very much, almost as much as she
loved Joe. Even when she was on her death bed, she refused to besmirch
the name and work of her husband by telling the truth about the polygamy
charges, even though it was well after his death. Emma Smith provides
the Moral support beam and safety net for Joe, regardless of what he
gets in to. Whether that meant looking the other way when he was
blatantly plagerising the contents of a currently printed book, for the
contents of the BOM, or peeling dried hot tar and feathers off Joe's
burned skin during the church's multiple persecutions and exodus'. She
held him up, right until the gunfight that ended in his death that left
her pregnant and widowed.

After that we talked about Martin Harris. We call him Not So Smarty
Marty because quite frankly, his credulity makes him a fuckin idiot. He
was a stern but honest man in all his business dealings, but had quite
the predisposition toward anything spiritual or relating to God. He also
owned a fairly large, and relatively sucessful farm of some 240 acres,
until he met Joe at least, the value of which was estimated to be about
$5-7,000, this farm was primarily purchased with a large sum inheritence
that Marty built his entire financial profile on. Altogether, the man
was worth an estimated $10,000 including all his assets and interests,
that's close to a quarter of a million today, but all that money can
attract a lot of unwanted snake oil salesmen. 

Joe was the first one to finally sink his teeth into Marty's wallet, and
he sucked the poor thing dry\! Before the BOM was printed, and after
Marty agreed to invest in Joe, he fought constantly with his wife,
beating her black and blue with a bullwhip on one documented occassion,
even though it was probably a pretty frequent occurence. He had an
affair with another woman that was living in his neighborhood at the
time according to his wife collaborated with the New york Census, an
affair which he didn't even seem terribly apologetic about. This affair
led to a divorce around the same time the note came due to pay the
printer for publishing the BOM, and Marty lost everything he had. The
farm, his wife, his rich friends in the area, everything he knew was
gone, and Marty was offically distitute. He resolved to trying to sell
the plates to a scholar we knew as
Not-So-Smarty-Marty's-Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal Charlie
Anthon, which was the same scholar that looked at a copy of some of the
inscriptions that were supposedly on the plates, called the caractors
manuscript, and Charlie basically laughed Marty out of his house.

In this episode we talked about Oliver Cowdery, aka Cowdung Allover. Not
only was he slender, with dark wavy hair, and piercing eyes, and a
chisled-jaw(description taken from ldsces.org), but he also had a
charming, and collected personality. He was also Joe's mom's third
cousin and we can resonably assume that Cowdung and Joe knew each other
growing up. Cowdung was quick as a whip and was a man "whose wit was
seldom matched in a debate". He was barely a year younger than Joe and
had a lot of charisma and drive for Jesus. He just so happened to know
the in's and out's of the printing business, which made him a fine
scribe and editor for really cheap. Luckily for Joe, not only did he
love him some Jesus, but he also loved him some scrying and dowsing,
which is something they shared in common. Cowdung's dad, and Joe's dad,
were part of the same treasure hunting cult so it's really no wonder
where Joe and Cowdung picked it up from, nor is it any sort of mystery
how Joe and Cowdung 'miraculously' came together to 'translate the
plates'. This led to Cowdung and Joe being the first supposed possesors
of the priesthood that was allegedly ordained by Peter James and John,
and John the Baptist

The next people we will talk about will be David Whitmer, and Sidney
Rigdon. We can't finish up the translation in our actual narrative until
they are introduced. After we do in depth analysis' of these two gents,
we will pick up where the narrative officially left off at the end of
episode one, Emma praying in the carriage while Joe digs up the plates
and hides them in a tree. We will try to cover the entire translation as
it possibly happened and I will try to include as much material as
possible relating to the source information for the BOM. I have said
before that Joseph Smith was a great sythesizer of information. He had
an uncanny ability to draw information from multiple sources and put his
own twist on it, so as not to betray it's source, so the places he took
the information for the BOM from, are vary far and wide.

I hope that I'll be able to shock you with some of the comparisons that
are drawn, from material that was available to Joe at the time, to the
BOM, once we finally dive in to the analysis of it. Mormons love to say
that there is no way that Joe could've had the mental capacity to author
such a book in such a short amount of time. But when we examine the
source material he could have used, and compare it with an actual
timeline of when Joe could have been writing this book, we'll be able to
make our own judgement of this popular claim.

I hope this episode was stimulating enough. We didn't really have as
much information about Cowdung Allover to go on as we did about the
others we have analyzed, but the time before he was scribe, is nowhere
near as important as his time during and after the translation, that's
when things start to get fun. I know that these biography episodes are
probably excruciating, but please bear with me. In the grand scheme of
things, our narrative hasn't even begun. I so desperately want to tell
you about so many crazy things that happen, but it's simply untimely to
do so right now. But, I guess that's about all I have for this episode,
talk at ya next time, here on the Naked Mormonism Podcast.

Read JSH 73
