---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 4 - Martin Harris Pt.2 Meeting of the Minds
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-4-martin-harris-pt-2-meeting-minds/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep4-martin-harris-pt2-meeting-of-the-minds
libsyn_embed: 3169125

category: History
date: 2014-11-08 18:09:42 PST
---

Hello,

Welcome to the Naked Mormonism podcast, my name is Bryce Blankenagel and
thank you for joining me. Here, we study the history of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (or LDS Church). Not the sugar coated
PR friendly history that the church itself teaches, but the real history
so we can know where it really came from, and compare it to the current
teachings of the church. I'm looking to build a body of knowledge,
hopefully with your help, about the LDS church in it's factual entirety
so listeners can understand what this thing really is. I also want to
call Martin Harris out on his wife-beating, bold-faced lying, and his
fuck-everybody-I'm-makin-some-money attitude, so if any of that offended
you, then you should either shut it off, or, open your mind, give it a
listen and try to reconcile why the facts offend you.

On today's episode, we are going to finish talking about Martin Harris,
or as we know him Not-So-Smarty-Marty, until we talk about the 11
witnesses of the plates.

Alright, our narrative left off with Martin Harris giving $50 to joe to
pay his court fees and other debts and move to his in-laws house in
Pennsylvania. Now, let's talk about how Joe really "translated" the gold
plates. This recently publicized controversy has been a source of
interest to south park watchers and true believing mormons alike. While
many paintings and pictures used in LDS churches and books depict a
prayerful Joe leaning over the plates, it is truly incontrovertable that
Joe used a hat and a seer stone to translate them.

In his *_Comprehensive History of the Church _*(*_CHC_*), LDS historian
and Brigham H. Roberts quotes NSSM. He said that Smith possessed a seer
stone, described by Roberts as a "chocolate-colored, somewhat egg-shaped
stone which the Prophet found while digging a well in company with his
brother Hyrum." 

This is a quote from Marty himself.

I will now give you a description of the manner in which the Book of
Mormon was translated. Joseph would put the seer stone into a hat, and
put his face in the hat, drawing it closely around his face to exclude
the light; and in the darkness the spiritual light would shine.

[Martin Harris](http://www.mormonquotes.com/Martin_Harris), *An Address
to All Believers in Christ, p. 12*

NSSM was smart enough to keep an eye on his investment and ended up
scribing for Joe for the 116 pages we talked about. After Joe would put
his head in the hat like an emu shoves their head into the ground this
would happen.

"By aid of the Seer Stone, sentences would appear and were read by the
Prophet and written by Me \[Martin\], and when finished \[I\] would say
'written;' and if correctly written, the sentence would disappear and
another appear in its place; but if not written correctly it remained
until corrected, so that the translation was just as it was engraven on
the plates, precisely in the language then used" (*CHC* 1:29).

NSSM's description concurs with that of David Whitmer, another big
hitter whose testimony appears in the beginning of the B*_ook of Mormon
along with Oliver Cowdery and NSSM_*. We will talk about David Whitmer
and Oliver Cowdery, and give them proper NaMo names in upcoming episodes
but for now just understand they both play big parts in the foundation
of the church and we will be refferring to them pretty frequently for a
while. Anyway, David Whitmer was quoted on page 12 of his book *_An
Address to All Believers in Christ,_*

"I will now give you a description of the manner in which the Book of
Mormon was translated. Joseph Smith would put the seer stone into a hat,
and put his face in the hat, drawing it closely around his face to
exclude the light; and in the darkness the spiritual light would shine.
A piece of something resembling parchment would appear, and under it was
the interpretation in English. Brother Joseph would read off the English
to Oliver Cowdery, who was his principal scribe, and when it was written
down and repeated to brother Joseph to see if it was correct, then it
would disappear, and another character with the interpretation would
appear. Thus the Book of Mormon was translated by the gift and power of
God, and not by any power of man."

'Not by any power of man.'........ That is an interesting thing to say.
I'm tempted to unpack it and speculate saying that the plates didn't
even need to present if everything was translated from a fuckin rock in
hat\!, but why is this something that the church doesn't readily talk
about? There is no mention of a hat anywhere on the Lds.org website, but
the very people who translated it don't talk about Joe reading from
plates with a chest plate that was equipped with 2500 y.o. glasses
fastened to them, they only talk about a convicted con-man staring into
a smelly old hat with a fuckin brown rock in it. 

Sorry, I went away there for a minute, I'm back now. Joe dictated 116
pages to NSSM which was called the book of Lehi. For anybody unfamiliar
with the Book of Mormon, Lehi is the name of the narrator's father for
most of the beginning of the book. Once these 116 pages were complete,
Marty, being the street-dumb, business wise guy he was, wanted to get an
outside opinion on how the book was going. I assume he wanted to either
vindicate joe as holy sounding enough to be an actual called prophet of
God, or have somebody say this is utter bullshit and you should cut your
losses and run from that asshole Joe.

Well, Lucy, NSSM's cousin wife, did exactly that. We heard her statement
earlier, remember that, she said Marty beat her so hard that she had
marks for two weeks after. We don't actually have record of this to
prove the correlation, but I want to speculate that she read the 116
pages and considered them complete bollocks\! At which point, she
decided to hide them from Marty on her own volition. Marty beat the
living hell out of her because she wouldn't tell him where she hid the
pages because, if Joe was a holy man with divine source material, he
could just translate the same thing over again, right??? She never gave
up the manuscript and sent Marty back to Joe in Pennsylvania with empty
hands. 

I hope you guys can hearken back to episode 1, I read a preface from the
1830 manuscript of the Book of Mormon, written by the hand of Joe. You
know what, I'll just read it again, it isn't too arduous.

As many false reports have been circulated respecting the following
work, and also many unlawful measures taken by the evil designing
persons to destroy me, and also the work, I would inform you that I
translated, by the gift and power of God, and caused to be written, one
hundred and sixteen pages, the which I took from the Book of Lehi, which
was an account abridged from the plates of Lehi, by the hand of Mormon;
which said account, some person or persons have stolen and kept from me,
notwithstanding my utmost exertions to recover it again—and being
commanded of the Lord that I should not translate the same over again,
for Satan had put it into their hearts to tempt the Lord their God, by
altering the words, that they did read contrary from that which I
translated and caused to be written; and if I should bring forth the
same words again, or, in other words, if I should translate the same
over again, they would publish that which they had stolen, and Satan
would stir up the hearts of this generation, that they might not receive
this work: but behold, the Lord said unto me, I will not suffer that
Satan shall accomplish his evil design in this thing: therefore thou
shalt translate from the plates of Nephi, until ye come to that which ye
have translated, which ye have retained; and behold ye shall publish it
as the record of Nephi; and thus I will confound those who have altered
my words. I will not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will
shew unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the Devil.
Wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, I have, through
his grace and mercy, accomplished that which he hath commanded me
respecting this thing. I would also inform you that the plates of which
hath been spoken, were found in the township of Manchester, Ontario
county, New-York. 

Upon learning that the 116 pages were lost, Joseph had his first
recorded divine revelation. This is what makes up D\&C section 3. Verse
13-15 Who has set at naught the counsels of God, and has broken the most
sacred promises which were made before God, and had depended upon his
own judgment and boasted in his own wisdom. 14 And this is the reason
that thous hast lost thy privileges for a season- 15 For thou hast
suffered the counsel of thy director to be trampled upon from the
beginning 

Yes, Joe went home pouting cuz that bitch Lucy Harris stole all his hard
work for the past 4 months, and he came back with divine revelation
saying that he can't translate for a little while because god's acting
pissy cuz Marty fucked up\!

A little side note, slightly further down in that same section 3, Joe
talks, about not only the Lamanites, but about the Josephites, the
Lemuelites, the Ishmaelites, the Jacobites, and even mentions the
Lamanites coming to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. How the fuck did he
know all of this when all he had translated was the very first part of
the plates from the perspective of one person, Lehi? It's so
demonstrably clear that he had an outline of what was going to be
"translated" before he dictated it. He had been imagining this shit into
existence since 1823 when Moroni first popped in to his room for a
visit\! He was just pissed off that he had done so much work all for
nothing and now he was stuck in between a rock and a hard place. Should
he try and re-create the beginning from Lehi's perspective and possibly
fight a legal and reputation battle upon release of his manuscript
because of the discrepencies, or just re-write it completely from
Nephi's perspective, and instantly justify the discrepencies as
perspective differences dodging the perverbial PR bullet. Well,
obviously, Joe chose correctly because he won out and the lost 116 page
manuscript remains forever lost with no known trace anywhere.

Joe started translating again in 1829 with the help of David Whitmer and
Oliver Cowdery, still with the funding from NSSM. I mentioned David and
Oliver earlier but they are way too much to get into now. Let's just
fininsh up the translation of the Book of Mormon, please bear with me on
the boredom, we are almost done with the entire authorship of the BOM
and there are just a few more points to get to. 

If anybody is interested, D\&C section 10 contains the revelation
telling Joe to translate from a different section of the plates, meaning
the books of Nephi. With his new dream team of translators, and his
reinstated power of translation, the first Book of Mormon manuscript was
produced in August 1829. Then, NSSM made the Not-So-Smartiest move one
could possibly imagine.... He mortgaged his house and 240 acreage to
finance the printing of the Book of Mormon. It's amazing to imagine that
kinko's or even high efficiency in home printers didn't really exist at
that time. We are talking about an early 19<sup>th</sup> century
printing press with individual letter tiles. This method of mass
printing is only marginally better than houses full of monks that each
copy only one book at a time for years on end. Being such a costly and
tenacious process, Marty obviously had a lot of financial stake rooted
in the success of the Book of Mormon and consequently the Mormon
religion itself. 

Let's hear what Dallin H. Oaks has to say about these financial
contributions.

One of Martin Harris’s greatest contributions to the Church, for which
he should be honored for all time, was his financing the publication of
the Book of Mormon. In August 1829 he mortgaged his home and farm to
Egbert B. Grandin to secure payment on the printer’s contract. Seven
months later, the 5,000 copies of the first printing of the Book of
Mormon were completed. Later, when the mortgage note fell due, the home
and a portion of the farm were sold for $3,000. In this way, Martin
Harris was obedient to the Lord’s revelation:
<span id="anchor"></span>“Thou shalt not covet thine own property, but
impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon. …

<span id="anchor-1"></span>“Pay the debt thou hast contracted with the
printer. Release thyself from bondage” That last part was supposedly
divine revelation from Joe in ([D\&C
Section 19:26, 35](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/19.26,35?lang=eng#25))
he was kind of an asshole......

Honestly, I feel pretty bad for NSSM. He was just a superstitous
business man that got suckered into selling his farm so a failed holy
book could be published. If somebody would have told Marty at that time,
that in 2012 the Mormon church would own a 5 billion dollar shopping
mall in the heart of Salt Lake City, he wouldn't have known whether to
shit or go blind because that $3000 that he mortgaged off for print,
would be the equivalent of about $127000 now, and that was pretty much
everything he had. We will eventually talk about the Mormon shopping
mall known as City Creek Center, it might have to be a bonus episode or
something because I don't think we are going to be done with church
history for quite some time.

Anyway, back to pitying NSSM. Joe did such a great job pulling the wool
over Marty's eyes and Marty thought he was in control the whole time. If
anything this hopefully demonstrates how diabolical and manipulative
Joseph Smith was. Don't worry, Joe wasn't this way to only Marty, you
will see it become a recurring theme throughout the foundation of the
church. In soon to come episodes, we will cover the 11 witnesses
testimonies in great length and you will hopefully begin to understand
how persuasive and charismatic Joe was.

Take this bit for example. This is from Dean C. Jessee, “Joseph Knight’s
Recollection of Early Mormon History,” *BYU Studies,* 17 (Autumn
1976):31 

After returning from a trip to Palmyra to settle his affairs, Martin
began to transcribe. From April 12 to June 14, Joseph translated while
Martin wrote, with only a curtain between them. On occasion they took
breaks from the arduous task, sometimes going to the river and throwing
stones. Once Martin found a rock closely resembling the seerstone Joseph
sometimes used in place of the interpreters and substituted it without
the Prophet’s knowledge. When the translation resumed, Joseph paused for
a long time and then exclaimed, “Martin, what is the matter, all is as
dark as Egypt.” Martin then confessed that he wished to “stop the mouths
of fools” who told him that the Prophet memorized sentences and merely
repeated
them. [27](https://www.lds.org/ensign/1988/01/a-new-prophet-and-a-new-scripture-the-coming-forth-of-the-book-of-mormon?lang=eng#footnote27-03222_000_006)

Joe was obviously playing Marty like a fiddle. Marty truly must have
believed every last thing that came out of Joe's mouth because, as we
will later find out, he gets his overly credulous ass financially,
spiritually, maritally, and morally kicked by everything Joe put him
through. Something we read later illustrates how much of a sucker he was
for what came out of Joe's mouth.

Next we need to talk about three scholars, Luther Bradish, Charles
Anthon, and Samuel L. Mitchill. Charles Anthon is the only one of the
three that we need to talk about, because he's the only one that left
anything behind for us to look at, so we'll refer to him as 

Not-So-Smarty-Marty's-Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal Charlie....

Or just Smarty Charly. NSSM, being the business genius he was, decided
that it might be a good idea to verify that Joe was indeed translating a
recognizable ancient language. It would seem that if the ancient text
could be verified, it would lend a lot of credence to the work Joe and
Marty were engaged in. Think about the publicity, headlines reading
"Ancient golden plates found in new york home backyard, has inscriptions
validated by Colombia College professor to be genuine\!" People would
lose their minds right? People would literally travel thousands of miles
for a chance to study it in comparison with other ancient texts of the
same time and period, right? And if it were truly found to be another
testament of Jesus Christ, upon translation by multiple bodies of
scholars of course, this would truly change the entire religous world,
right? 

But, what if the symbols on the source text can-not be verified for
various reasons? We should find out first, what those reasons for
inaccessibility to the original are, and second, find out why the
symbols that are revealed, don't comport with any ancient languages we
are aware of.

Well, NSSM was smart enough to use the 'call a friend' lifeline and
found just such a professor at said Colombia College, to do said ancient
language verification task. Let's dig in to Smarty Charlie.

Smarty Charlie was the son of a revolutionary war medical veteran, who
later became a surgeon general. Charlie grew up in New york and
eventually graduated Colombia with honors in 1815. He became assitant
professor of Greek and Latin at Colombia in 1820 and later went on to
become full professor, and director of the entire languages department
at the college, a post he held until 1864. 

Marty must have assumed that this dood was the right dood for the job.
Honestly, you can't really blame him. I mean, every early testament
manuscript of Jesus Christ that has ever been found has been in Greek as
opposed to Aramaic which Jesus theoretically spoke, no ancient
manuscript has ever been found in ancient Hebrew that is a testament of
Jesus Christ, and NOOO egyptian text has ever been found that has
anything to do with Jesus of Nazareth. So a professor of Greek and Latin
would seem like a logical person to seek the expertise of, when talking
about ancient holy texts that profess knowledge of Jesus Christ. 

Well, unfortunately, Joe was the only person on the planet that ever,
reportedly, saw the engravings that were on the plates. There wasn't
room for two people's heads in one divinely inspired hat so Marty had to
comprimise, which meant he was forced to ask Joe to copy down an
inscription from the plates onto a piece of paper. Joe was pretty
reluctant to give it up at first, but any smart business man knows that
50 no's and a yes means yes, and Joe finally gave up the goods.

NSSM went to Not-So-Smarty-Marty's-Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal
Charlie Anthon, at Colombia to hopefully be told the good news that Joe
was translating genuine ancient characters. Let's hear what Marty had to
say about the situation in a letter he wrote.

I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had
been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles
Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor
Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had
before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which
were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic,
Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me
a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true
characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been
translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my
pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back,
and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in
the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had
revealed it unto him. 65 He then said to me, 'Let me see that
certificate.' I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him,
when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such
thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates
to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates
were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, 'I
cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who
sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters
and the translation.([Joseph Smith
History 1:64–65](http://scriptures.lds.org/js_h/1/64#65)). 

Now I really want to dive in to the claims that Marty makes here but
first we have to get
Not-So-Smarty-Marty's-Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal Charlie's side
of the meeting. Unfortunately, one of the only things we have recorded
by Charlie is this letter almost exactly 6 years after the occurence,
just as the stories of 'The Mormons' were starting to run rampant
throughout NY, so the accuracy of his statement may need to be taken
with a grain of salt. It is written by Charles Anthon to E.D. Howe who
was reporting on the Mormons at the time. The letter is kind of long,
but it provides a lot of good information and I do plan on adding some
commentary to it, primarily conclusions I have drawn from all the
evidence I can find about the situation.

New York, Feb. 17, 1834

Dear Sir –

    I received this morning your favor of the 9th instant, and lose no
time in making a reply. The whole story about my having pronounced the
Mormonite inscription to be "reformed Egyptian hieroglyphics"
is *perfectly false*. Some years ago, a plain, and apparently
simple-hearted farmer, called upon me with a note from Dr. Mitchell of
our city, now deceased, requesting me to decypher, if possible, a paper,
which the farmer would hand me, and which Dr. M. confessed he had been
unable to understand. Upon examining the paper in question, I soon came
to the conclusion that it was all a trick, perhaps a *hoax. *When I
asked the person, who brought it, how he obtained the writing, he gave
me, as far as I can now recollect, the following account: A "gold book,"
consisting of a number of plates of gold, fastened together in the shape
of a book by wires of the same metal, had been dug up in the northern
part of the state of New York, and along with the book an enormous pair
of "*gold spectacles*"\! These spectacles were so large, that, if a
person attempted to look through them, his two eyes would have to be
turned towards *one* of the glasses merely, the spectacles in question
being altogether too large for the breadth of the human face. Whoever
examined the plates through the spectacles, was enabled not only
to *read *them, but fully to*understand *their meaning. All this
knowledge, however, was confined at that time to a young man, who had
the trunk containing the book and spectacles in his sole possession.
This young man was placed behind a curtain, in the garret of a farm
house, and, being thus concealed from view, put on the spectacles
occasionally, or rather, looked through one of the glasses, decyphered
the characters in the book, and, having committed some of them to paper,
handed copies from behind the curtain, to those who stood on the
outside. Not a word, however, was said about the plates having been
decyphered "by the gift of God." Every thing, in this way, was effected
by the large pair of spectacles. The farmer added, that he had been
requested to contribute a sum of money towards the publication of the
"golden book," the contents of which would, as he had been assured,
produce an entire change in the world and save it from ruin. So urgent
had been these solicitations, that he intended selling his farm and
handing over the amount received to those who wished to publish the
plates. As a last precautionary step, however, he had resolved to come
to New York, and obtain the opinion of the learned about the meaning of
the paper which he brought with him, and which had been given him as a
part of the contents of the book, although no translation had been
furnished at the time by the young man with the spectacles. On hearing
this odd story, I changed my opinion about the paper, and, instead of
viewing it any longer as a hoax upon the learned, I began to regard it
as part of a scheme to cheat the farmer of his money, and I communicated
my suspicions to him, warning him to beware of rogues. He requested an
opinion from me in writing, which of course I declined giving, and he
then took his leave carrying the paper with him. This paper was in fact
a singular scrawl. It consisted of all kinds of crooked characters
disposed in columns, and had evidently been prepared by some person who
had before him at the time a book containing various alphabets. Greek
and Hebrew letters, crosses and flourishes, Roman letters inverted or
placed sideways, were arranged in perpendicular columns, and the whole
ended in a rude delineation of a circle divided into various
compartments, decked with various strange marks, and evidently copied
after the Mexican Calender given by Humboldt, but copied in such a way
as not to betray the source whence it was derived. I am thus particular
as to the contents of the paper, inasmuch as I have frequently conversed
with my friends on the subject, since the Mormonite excitement began,
and well remember that the paper contained any thing else but "*Egyptian
Hieroglyphics*." Some time after, the same farmer paid me a second
visit. He brought with him the golden book in print, and offered it to
me for sale. I declined purchasing. He then asked permission to leave
the book with me for examination. I declined receiving it, although his
manner was strangely urgent. I adverted once more to the roguery which
had been in my opinion practised upon him, and asked him what had become
of the gold plates. He informed me that they were in a trunk with the
large pair of spectacles. I advised him to go to a magistrate and have
the trunk examined. He said the "curse of God" would come upon him
should he do this. On my pressing him, however, to pursue the course
which I had recommended, he told me that he would open the trunk, if I
would take the "curse of God" upon myself. I replied that I would do so
with the greatest willingness, and would incur every risk of that
nature, provided I could only extricate him from the grasp of rogues. He
then left me.

    I have thus given you a full statement of all that I know respecting
the origin of Mormonism, and must beg you, as a personal favor, to
publish this letter immediately, should you find my name mentioned again
by these wretched fanatics.

Yours respectfully, CHAS. ANTHON.

That seemed to be relatively straight forward. I will be honest, from
the research that I have been doing, this letter is often quote mined
for intellectually nefarious reasons. I think it is important to read it
in it's entirety and examine it in comparison to NSSM's side of the
story.

I will be posting in the show notes a picture of the 'Caractors'
manuscript that Marty reportedly took with him for this meeting, we'll
talk all about it in a minute when we examine Charlie's letter.
<http://solomonspalding.com/SRP/saga/anthon2a.gif>

But first, let's talk about Marty's side of the meeting. He did make
some fairly extraordinary claims, " Professor Anthon stated that the
translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated
from the Egyptian". Getting into the lingual anachronisms in the book of
mormon will probably be an episode itself, so for now, let's just go
with the claim that the church currently posites, and say it was
'reformed' Egyptian that Joe was translating from. 

Let me give you some background on scholarly comprehension of ancient
Egyptian. We had none until 1822 when [Jean-François
Champollion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-François_Champollion)
published his early work on the Rosetta Stone translation. Hundreds of
scholars had been working to compile a functioning model of the Egyptian
language since the Stone's discovery in 1799. Along with some major
correspondence, and customary diverging stories of exactly who deserves
final credit, Champollion published a fairly comprehensive Egyptian
dictionary in late 1822. This dictionary took until 1858 to arrive on
the east coast in an english translation. It wasn't even translated to
Latin, which Charlie was well versed in, until the early 1840's, so
there is no possible way that Charlie would have any idea what he was
looking at when he and Marty met in 1828. 

I would argue that there weren't even that many people alive in the
world, that could have looked that the manuscript Marty had, and be able
to confirm that it was indeed an accurate translation. The knowlege
simply did not exist. But, let's examine Marty's next extraordinary
claim. " I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he
said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he
said they were true characters". Once again I just have to hearken back
to the simple fact that nobody on the east coast would have been able to
make this claim at this time, with the exception of Joseph Smith of
course, and I have to imagine that Charlie was an intellecually honest
guy. At the time he was trying to gain noteriety for his scholarly work,
and I can't imagine that he would put his career and professional name
on the line for some people he described as 'rogues', just to....
what.... fuck with this "simple-hearted farmer", that just doesn't make
any sense.

Let's look at Marty's next big claim. "He gave me a certificate,
certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and
that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also
correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just
leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the
young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he
found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him. 65
He then said to me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I accordingly took it
out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to
pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of
angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate
them." 

There are some problems here, I can't imagine that Charlie wasn't a
religious man at this time, he was well versed in Greek and Latin, two
common major studies for bible scholars at the time, and a bible scholar
would be the right person to bring the manuscript to, so kudos to NSSM.
I would think, that if Charlie recognized the translations were indeed
accurate, and follwing that, the person who brought him this manuscript,
told him they came from an uneducated young man who was shown their
location by an angel of God, would mark the merriment of his life's work
and faith and would likely spur some very serious action on Charlie's
part. Any professor would want to at least find out the facts behind
such an extraordinary occurence, and he could have his somewhat early
career launched into scholarly fame by being the first scholar that
vetted Mormonism. But he thought it was a hoax. According to his
account, he didn't even want to give Marty a letter saying that it was
false, probably because he didn't want to marr his burgening career, but
declined on the basis that it seemed like 'a scheme to cheat the farmer
out of his money'

I do have to mention that a letter was written in1841 by Charlie to
Reverend Coit of New Rochelle New York, that directly contradicts this
small claim.

"He \[Martin Harris\] then proceeded to give me the history of the whole
affair, which convinced me that he had fallen into the hands of some
sharper, while it left me in great astonishment at his simplicity. On my
telling the bearer of the paper that an attempt had been made to impose
on him and defraud him of his property, he requested me to give him my
opinion in writing about the paper which he had shown to me. I did so
without hesitation, partly for the man's sake, and partly to let the
individual 'behind the curtain' see that his trick was discovered."

I'm not really sure what to make of this blatant bipolar contradiction.
While it doesn't necessarily modify the meat and potatoes of Charlies
claims, it is something that I want to address. This letter is written 7
years after the first letter, making it 13 years after the incident
itself. I highly doubt that Charlie had the foresight to see Mormonism
gaining it's terrible reputation 13 years after such a simple-hearted
wealthy farmer came to speak with him for possibly an hour about some
scratchings on a piece of paper. I doubt that Charlie even gave the
meeting much thought at the time. However, I would be willing to bet
that the church dubiously used Charlie's name to claim authenticity
based off NSSM's recounting of the story. Marty's account not only
serves to villianize Charlie and intellectuals as a whole, but it also
claimed that he told Marty that Joe knew what the fuck he was doing
which is a claim that I cannot see coming from Charles Anthon. The
church must have been using this all along because they still use it
today\! I pulled Martin Harris's account from the LDS.org website and it
was from the Joseph Smith History\!.... To anybody that is unaware of
what that is, the Joseph Smith History is another small book contained
in the Pearl of Great Price, which is Mormon holy canon, written by the
hand of Joe himself. We'll probably refer to it a lot in the future,
because it is so fascinating and offers a lot of insights that Mormons
don't always know about today.

So you can see the urgency in Charlie's letters to divorce himself from
the Mormon church. It was shitting all over his name because every
Mormon missionary would claim that Charlie verified the accuracy of the
plates, and the people they preached to didn't have the knowledge or the
resources to find and verify this claim. If the investigator asked the
missionary if they could see a copy of the certificate of authenticity
from Charlie, the missionaries would simply say 'well when Marty told
Charlie that Joe found the plates by revelation from an angel, Charlie
ripped the paper up so we don't really have proof of it..... But we
swear he said it's true\!\!' The people that were 'lying for the lord'
at the foundations of the church could never understand how readily
available all this information would be for us today, unfortunately, the
church has grown exponentially for almost 185 years and that is a lot of
foundation to chip away at.

Let's jump on Charlie's final claim to finish out the episode. 

"He brought with him the golden book in print, and offered it to me for
sale. I declined purchasing. He then asked permission to leave the book
with me for examination. I declined receiving it, although his manner
was strangely urgent. I adverted once more to the roguery which had been
in my opinion practised upon him, and asked him what had become of the
gold plates. He informed me that they were in a trunk with the large
pair of spectacles. I advised him to go to a magistrate and have the
trunk examined. He said the "curse of God" would come upon him should he
do this. On my pressing him, however, to pursue the course which I had
recommended, he told me that he would open the trunk, if I would take
the "curse of God" upon myself. I replied that I would do so with the
greatest willingness, and would incur every risk of that nature,
provided I could only extricate him from the grasp of rogues. He then
left me."

There is truly no Mormon reference to this secondary meeting. I could
not find a single apologist that talks about it, no Mormon website
refers to, much less tries to refute it, it's just simply overlooked.
However, I do find this to be quite hilarious. It illustrates how hard
up for money Marty was as well as the kind of person Charlie was.
Charlie told Marty outright that Joe was full of meerkat shit, and Marty
tried to sell the plates to Charlie. Charlie probably laughed at him and
said I'll be happy to take on the curse of God, not to purchase them,
but to prove myself right and show you how bad you were hoodwinked, and
Marty storms off.

We do have to weigh the content of these claims individually and upon
the merits of the individuals who made such claims. On the one hand, you
have Not-So-Smarty-Marty's-Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal Charlie
Anthon, who is a burgening scholar making no positive claims of
authenticity. But rather, he tells Marty on two occasions that he is
being defcon 5 level swindled here and Marty storms off in a fit of rage
both times. Then we have NSSM himself, the simple farmer with an assload
of money that has made a significant financial investment. He tries to
verify the accuracy of the plates and fails, which follows by him saying
to him 'if you leave me alone I'll make money of it' to his wife. She
leaves his broke ass, and he's left to make money the only way he can
after loosing everything to Joseph Smith's selfish so-called
"revelations", by trying to sell the plates to the person that told him
he's already fucked. Marty had a financial stake in the accuracy of the
BOM, and was well known for lying about things only relating to
mormonism, whereas Charlie had nothing to gain from the meeting, and
probably went home that night and laughed about it, thinking it would
never become what it did.

Charlie went on to retire from headmaster position of the Colombia
Language and Grammar school in 1864. Marty went on to do all kinds of
crazy things in the church that we can't really get into now. But, for
the most part that sums up Martin Harris' role in the very early
foundations of the church. We will keep a tab on Marty and refer to him
from time to time, but that's about all as we need to know concerning
NSSM for now. I hope this episode was just as enjoyable as the previous
episode, thank you for joining me this week, and check out next week
when we examine Oliver Cowdery in depth, here on the Naked Mormonism
podcast.

Any material or intellectual property used in this podcast is that of
the owner of the copyright, and is used in accordance with the fair use
act for educational and commentary purposes only. This podcast is made
under creative commons, for the purpose of open, distribution and
education. Any citations needed, that are not mentioned, are available
in the show notes.
