---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 1 - Introduction to Mormonism and Joseph Smith
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-1-introduction-mormonism-joseph-smith/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep1-introduction-to-mormonism-and-joseph-smith
libsyn_embed: 3169073

category: History
date: 2014-11-08 16:55:58 PST
---

Ep 1 – Introduction to Joseph Smith and Naked Mormonism Podcast

On this episode, we begin with a very brief introduction to the purpose
and focus of this podcast. After that, we take some time to discuss the
history of Joseph Smith from birth to his early public life. Various
details of the Smith family are revealed by neighbors as well as Lucy
Mack Smith, Joseph’s mother. We also get a very simplistic understanding
of magic and occult traditions followed by the Smith family and Joseph
specifically. The episode ends with a short introduction to the host,
Bryce Blankenagel, as well as a directory to the backlog of the podcast.

This edition of Episode 1 was recorded after the end of the “Road to
Carthage” series which marked the end of Joseph Smith’s life.

Show notes of entire historical timeline:
<http://scripts.nakedmormonismpodcast.com/>

Merch shop:
<https://groundgnomes.launchcart.store/joseph-smith-puppet-master-unisex-white-t-shirt/p/wdj205>

Show links:  
Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)Twitter [@NakedMormonism  
](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)Facebook
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>Patreon
<http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>Music by Jason Comeau
<http://aloststateofmind.com/>Show Artwork
<http://weirdmormonshit.com/>Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Welcome to Naked Mormonism, the serial Mormon history podcast. I’m your
host, Bryce Blankenagel; I’m a history communicator and I really
appreciate you taking some time to give this podcast a listen. This show
is a chronological history of Joseph Smith and early Mormonism. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today boasts a membership of
over 16 million people and is the wealthiest and most politically
powerful religion in America. The religion started by Joseph Smith,
originally called the Church of Christ, eventually became The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has over 400 child sects as of the
early 21<sup>st</sup> century. Mormonism, for many, is more than just a
religion, but an identity. Mormons pride themselves as being a peculiar
people. A peculiar people obviously carry a peculiar history and the
focus of this podcast is to demystify and secularize the history of
Mormonism. I’ve done my best to make the chronology of early Mormonism
interesting and accessible even to those with absolutely no background
or personal attachment to the religion or culture. Believe it or not,
Mormon history is interesting enough that even those who’ve never been a
member can find it just as fascinating as those who believe the
supernatural claims made by the various leaders of the various sects. My
hope is that, regardless of your personal beliefs, you find the field of
Mormon history fascinating and the characters within it compelling,
flawed, and most importantly, human.

At the end of today’s episode, I’ll give a brief introduction to myself
as well as a directory for the backlog of the podcast. With that
introduction out of the way, let’s begin with the history of early
Mormonism in the only place we can, the founder himself, Joseph Smith.

Jo was born in Sharon, Vermont on December 23, 1805. Brief sidenote, if
you don’t like Joseph Smith being called “Jo,” this may not be the
podcast for you, but I encourage you to step outside your comfort zone
and keep listening.

The Smith family were exceptionally destitute, forcing the members of
the family to seek nearly any source of income to keep themselves fed.
Most of what we know about Jo’s early life comes from his mother, Lucy
Mack Smith, when she dictated her personal history of the Smith family
and Joseph Smith in 1845 after Jo was assassinated while running for
President of the United States. Sources of Jo’s early life outside
Lucy’s Biographical Sketches don’t emerge until the early to mid-1820s
when Jo began to enter the public sphere and make a name for himself.

Joseph’s parents are fascinating people, Joseph Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith.
Joseph Sr. didn’t seem to be much for religion, instead engaging in more
spiritual and magical pursuits, which we’ll discuss momentarily. Lucy,
on the other hand, was much more inclined toward organized religion. She
remembers:

> while we were yet living in the Town of Tunbridge I was very seriously
> impressed the subject of religion occasioned probably by my singular
> experience while sick at Randolf and I endeavored to persuade my
> husband to attend the methodist meeting with me he went a few times to
> gratify me for he had so little faith in the doctrines taught by them
> that my feelings were the only inducement for him to go—But as soon as
> his Father and brother Jesse heard that we were attending Methodist
> meeting they were much displeased and his father came to the door one
> day and threw Tom Pains age of reason into the house and angrily bade
> him read that untill he believed
> it[24](http://signaturebookslibrary.org/lucys-book-2/#Pre-Mormon%20Years%2024) \[p.292\]they
> also told him thou \[*sic*\] he ought not to let his wife go to the
> meetings and it would be far better for him to stop going ~~this gave
> me very~~ accordingly my husband requested me not to go as it gave our
> friends such disagreeable feelings he thought it was hardly worth our
> while

While Joseph Sr. was chastised by his in-laws to read the quintessential
pamphlet of deism by Thomas Paine, Lucy began her own quest for
spiritual enlightenment. Lucy went into “a grove of handsome wild cherry
trees and prayed to the Lord that he \<would\> so influence the heart of
my husband that he would be induced to receive the gospel”. Lucy didn’t
receive her enlightenment in the woods that day, but instead went home
“depressed in spirits”. However, as she was falling asleep that night,
a vision opened to her where she “gazed upon \[beautiful trees\] with
wonder and admiration, and after beholding them a short time, I saw one
of them was surrounded with a bright belt, that shone like burnished
gold, but far more brilliantly.” As she viewed these trees with a fairy
ring about their base, she noticed the trees were blowing in the wind
and seemed “lively and animated” in appearance, which conveyed “the
utmost joy and happiness.” A dancing sunbeam shone down on everything in
her vision that night and Lucy “wondered… What can be the meaning of all
this? And the interpretation given me was, that the personated my
husband and his oldest brother, Jesse Smith; that the stubborn and
unyielding tree was like Jesse; that the other, more pliant and
flexible, was like Joseph, my husband; that the breath of heaven, which
passed over them, was the pure and undefiled Gospel of the Son of God,
which Gospel Jesse would always resist, but which Joseph, when he was
more advanced in life, would hear and receive with his whole heart, and
rejoice therein”.

Soon after Lucy had her vision, Joseph Sr. had a series of 7 similar
visions which also included descriptions of him eating plants that were
likely psychedelic, and seeing wealthy people in a great and spacious
building. Elements within these visions would resurface in Jo’s own
writings within the pages of the Book of Mormon and Book of Moses with
the visions of Lehi, Nephi, and Enoch. It’s also worth noting that the
visions Lucy reported she and her husband had were only ever written
down in her memoir, dictated in 1845, 15 years after the Book of Mormon
was published and the church was founded by her son, Joseph Jr. The
direction of influence of these visions remains a subject of controversy
among historians today. What is undisputed, however, is that the Smith
family in the 1800-20s were seekers, rarely siding with any specific
religious creed in lieu of wandering the world of non-denominational
spiritualism. This helps us to understand the magic worldview of the
Smith family and other aspects of their story we’ll discuss in a few
minutes.

Before that, a few stories from Jo’s early childhood are worth
mentioning. The Smith children were stricken with an epidemic of
typhoid. Jo’s eldest sister, Sophronia, lay catatonic for nearly 3
months and was presumed dead before she recovered. Young Joseph also
took ill and recovered, but not without long-term consequences. A growth
emerged on his shoulder which was lanced, but the infection remained. It
eventually migrated to his leg and he was unable to walk for weeks.
Finally, a surgeon resolved to amputate young Jo’s leg. Amputation in
the 19<sup>th</sup>-century was a condemnation to a life of vagrancy,
and Lucy wanted better for her son. Lucy recalls the conversation with
the surgeon:

> “amputation is absolutely necessary in order to save his life.” This
> was like a thunderbolt to me. I appealed to the principal surgeon,
> saying, “Dr. Stone, can you not make another trial? Can you not, by
> cutting around the bone, take out the diseased part, and perhaps that
> which is sound will heal over, and by this means you will save his
> leg? You will not, you must not, take off his leg, until you try once
> more. I will not consent to let you enter his room until you make me
> this promise.”

According to Lucy, the surgeon agreed to cut out the infected portion of
bone instead of amputating. The operation ended up succeeding, but it
left unseen scars in the mind of the young boy. He apparently refused to
be bound to the table with cords and refused any alcohol to mitigate the
pain. Mormons are taught in Sunday school that this is evidence of Jo’s
temperance and is often taught in conjunction with the health code
prohibiting alcohol, the Word of Wisdom. However, the story is best
understood when we attribute Jo’s aversion to alcohol as a result of his
father’s bouts of debauchery. Joseph Sr. was a noted drunk around town
and even excused his conduct in a patriarchal blessing to his son who
was always helping the Smith family while Joseph Sr. was “out of the way
with wine”. Young Jo had his entire childhood of seeing what alcohol did
to his father and how his mother reacted to Joseph Sr. often being drunk
and likely refused on those bases. Once again, however, we only know
this story from Lucy remembering it nearly 3 decades after it happened
so we have to take the story with a grain of salt. During his recovery
period from this surgery, Jo’s older brothers, Hyrum and Alvin, cared
for the young boy, often carrying him around when he became tired from
walking on crutches.

The Smith family eventually moved from Vermont to Palmyra, New York in
search of livelihood following the summer without sun. This summer
without sun was the result of a volcanic eruption which created an
atmospheric blanket and starved crops for the year of 1816. The Smiths
made their living largely from menial labor and by running a “cake and
beer” shop. This cake and beer would be made by Lucy and distributed
around town, particularly in the summer, by the children and Joseph Sr.
Lucy also painted rugs and did palm readings to help make ends meet.
They also harvested and made maple sugar during the winters to sell,
Lucy claims they made upwards of 1000 lbs per year.

At the age of 14, a fascinating occurrence happened to Joseph Smith.
Once again, this comes from Lucy who believed her beloved son, Joseph,
could do no wrong, which makes the occurrence that much more remarkable.

> At the age of fourteen, an incident occurred which alarmed us much, as
> we knew not the cause of it. Joseph being a remarkably quiet, well
> disposed child, we did not suspect that any one had aught against him.
> He was out one evening on an errand, and, on returning home, as he was
> passing through the door yard a gun was fired across his pathway, with
> the evident intention of shooting him. He sprang to the door much
> frightened. We immediately went in search of the assassin, but could
> find no trace of him that
> evening.[2](http://signaturebookslibrary.org/lucys-book-03/#Palmyra%202) The
> next morning we found his tracks under a waggon, where he lay when he
> fired; and the following day we found the balls which were discharged
> from the gun, lodged in the head and neck of a cow that was standing
> opposite the waggon, in a dark corner. We have not as yet discovered
> the man who made this attempt at murder, neither can we discover the
> cause thereof.

At the age of 14, somebody tried to murder the young boy. The
circumstances and identity of this attempt are still unknown, leaving
the details purely speculative. Speculation without being informed,
however, is just dreaming. To understand what might motivate somebody to
kill Joseph Smith at age 14, we need to understand how he and the rest
of the Smith men were making money at this time. Let’s begin with how
the Smiths became incredibly destitute to begin with.

Jo’s parents, Lucy and Joseph Sr. were married in 1796. According to
Lucy’s family history, her brother Stephen gave her a wedding gift of
$1,000. But, as a harbinger of future events, Joseph Sr. lost the entire
amount when he got suckered in an investment scam. He spent the family’s
savings buying ginseng, and then arranged to export it to China where
the investment would return a healthy sum. His business partner, a Mr.
Stevens, ran off to Canada with the entire proceeds of the deal, leaving
Joseph Sr. with $1800 in debt, shouldered by the entire Smith family.
They sold their farm, which was worth $1500, for just $800 to cover a
portion of the debt. The other $1000 came out of Lucy’s wedding gift,
leaving the newlyweds with nothing. The impacts of this situation are
far-reaching because, I would speculate, the lesson little Jo took from
his dad getting scammed was that there are two kinds of people in the
world: those who cheat, and those who get cheated.

Lucy’s father let the newlyweds rent part of his Vermont farmland for a
while until they got back on their feet. In order to finance the move to
New York, Lucy had to sell everything they owned in order to pay their
debts before they left, and Joseph Sr. had to borrow more money to pay
for a wagon to carry them there. Lucy’s family history says she arrived
in Palmyra with two cents in cash.

Their first year in New York they apparently did alright, mostly because
Lucy started a successful business to decorate furniture with painted
oilcloth, a source of income for nearly her entire life. Joseph Sr. and
his sons built a cabin and cleared some farmland by felling trees on a
small plot. But the second year they barely made their mortgage payment.
Lucy says they were “destitute of money, property, or acquaintance.” The
only reason they kept the farm was because the eldest son Alvin worked
himself to the bone as a hired hand earning money to pay the mortgage.
Alvin managed to stabilize his parents’ finances and started building
them a nicer house by 1824, but then he got sick and died, leaving the
family without its primary provider. Alvin’s death is a story for future
episode.

The Smiths remained largely destitute. They started selling cake and
beer, but unfortunately, Jo Sr. dabbled a little too deep into company
stock. Neighbors said that Joseph Sr. was a “noted drunkard.” Neighbor
Lorenzo Saunders even told a story about Joseph Sr. getting drunk at the
pub and bragging about how big his dick was. Apparently the other drunks
tried to measure it and pushed a ruler through the seat of his pants. At
one point, Joseph Sr. attended a turkey shoot and was so wasted he tried
to curse the other men’s guns so they’d miss every shot. Joseph Sr. was
never a stable support for the family and we can understand the
influences a father figure like this would have on young Joseph
throughout his impressionable childhood and teenage years.

The Smith men mostly did odd jobs and didn’t have a very stable income
or a great reputation in the neighborhood. One of the odd jobs they did
was money-digging. This requires a bit of a treatment because it informs
many of Jo’s religious praxis throughout his entire life and ministry.
The Smith family believed the world was moved and shaped by magic. Lucy
deals with criticisms the Smith family experienced relative to these
magic practices in her memoir.

> I shall change my theme for the present but let not my reader suppose
> that because I shall pursue another topic for a season that we stopt
> our labor and went \<at\> trying to win the faculty of Abrac drawing
> Magic circles or sooth saying to the neglect of all kinds of buisness
> we never during our lives suffered one important interest to swallow
> up every other obligation but whilst we worked with our hands we
> endeavored to remmember the service of & the welfare of our souls.  
> And not only temporal blessings were bestowed upon us, but also
> spiritual were administered. The Scripture, which saith, “Your old men
> shall dream dreams,” was fulfilled in the case of my husband, for,
> about this time, he had another vision, which I shall here relate;

After which she relates the sixth of seven visions Joseph Sr.
experienced. I don’t want that phrase to get lost in the passage “trying
to win the faculty of Abrac” is an important phrase. The faculty of
Abrac is a magical invocation, a protection spell if you will. Abrac
here could mean the spirit which moves and shapes the magic that flows
through all life and throughout the universe or it could refer more
explicitly to a specific spirit with more definite properties. These
magical spirits shouldn’t be construed to be satanic or evil as the
beliefs in magic are perfectly consistent with Christian theology. The
faculty of Abrac wasn’t a deity to worship, it was merely a spirit by
which the almighty god administered his will on the real world. In the
mind of the Smiths, magic was what caused the grass to grow, the earth
to turn, and the sun to shine. Achievements or good fortune are the
blessings of god, misfortune and illness are curses from evil or
familiar spirits. This world of occult traditions, and by occult I mean
the ye olde definition of occultare which means to hide, conceal,
secrete, or cover over, was the mechanism by which to understand the
mind of god. The magic worldview may seem foreign to us today, but
people sleep with crystals under their pillows and pray 5 times a day to
their deity, some of those people face mecca, others speak the same
exact prayers with the same words, same inflection, same tone of voice,
same everything so as to not offend the almighty spirit. Natural
disasters, pandemics, all forms of human suffering can be explained
through the will and power of god within the magic worldview by people
without the scientific underpinnings to understand what is really going
on. Magic thinking takes on all forms and there are plenty of people
alive today who engage in the exact occult practices the Smith family
did for all sorts of purposes.

Part of this occult practice is coding information in stories. For
example, Lucy Mack Smith recounts 5 of Joseph Sr.’s 7 dreams more than
30 years after he had them; it seems she was coding information in those
visions for only those who know the world of magic and occult to have
the spiritual eyes to decipher the stories. What that coded information
is, well… that’s a story for another time.

How these magic and occult practices manifested in the Smith family came
about in different ways. They would use divining rods, sticks made from
metal or witch hazel sticks, to locate water or buried treasure. Modern
prophets are called Prophets, seers, and revelators in the church, but
the term seer has a rich tradition in occultism. A seer was a person who
could literally see things that others couldn’t. They would use their
spiritual eyes to locate what others desired. Think of it like gazing at
a crystal ball, but less to do with prophesying future events and more
to see objects or events that are existing or happening in some location
that physical or natural eyes can’t see. Joseph Smith was a seer long
before he became a Prophet or revelator and a magic rock viewed in a
dark location was his magic implement of choice. There are many
implements magic users will employ to understand the forces of god’s
creation. Some will hold up a cane in the middle of a circle and
wherever the cane falls will answer their question. Some will hold
sticks and wait for the stick to twitch in their hands. Some will open
the Bible to a random page and point to a random passage seeking an
answer to a question they have. For some it’s astrology or numerology;
all of these practices and magic tools operate in the world of the
occult. The hidden world which underpins the physical world around us.
Each of these tools reveal the unseen world, and therefore the mind and
will of god.

These magic practices also create an economy. A person who can see
things others can’t claims a skill other people don’t have, and can
therefore charge money for it. To make ends meet, at night the Smiths
would go out and dig for Indian springs, old Spanish mines, or chests of
pirate gold and other treasures. This may seem insane to us, but there
was a whole treasure digging culture in New York, and a whole genre of
stories about treasures guarded by spirits and ghosts. The common
practice of treasure diggers was to hire a diviner or seer to locate the
treasure, and a conjuror or necromancer to bind the spirit so they could
get the treasure before the binding spell broke and the guardian spirit
secreted the treasure in another location or further underground. But if
you committed some error in the ritual, like speaking out of turn,
placing the iron or witch-hazel rods in the wrong place on the ground,
speaking the incantation incorrectly, performing the spell under the
wrong governing planet, or myriad other errors, the spirit would whisk
away the treasure and cause it to sink. The Ground Gnomes are so very
elusive. Understandably, the treasure-digging group almost always
committed some error or didn’t account for some variable and the
treasure would be lost before it could be unearthed. Usually the
conjuror still managed to walk away with a little pocket money from the
person who hired them to begin with. The diggers themselves were
probably comprised of some folks who understood it was all a con, and
others who truly believed they’d eventually get the money located by the
seer or diviner. However, other aspects of treasure digging were
unabashedly a con.

Historian Dan Vogel in his biography of Joseph Smith has laid out
convincingly how these seers and spirit conjurors basically were con
artists preying on naive farmers by leading them on with the promise of
treasure. Jo got pretty good at this hustle, a business he likely picked
up from Joseph Sr. or myriad other magic mentors in his life like Samuel
Lawrence, Sally Chase, Joseph Knight, or Luman Walters. Jo developed a
reputation in the Palmyra and Manchester neighborhood for being a
powerful seer. About 1823 he started telling stories about a golden book
that was buried somewhere in the neighborhood-- an ancient record
written on gold plates. While Alvin’s death is a story for another day,
one of the last things that Alvin said to him before he died was “Do
everything that lies in your power to obtain the record,” referring to
the gold plates. With Alvin gone, Joseph Sr. drunk half the time, and
Lucy at home trying desperately to support ten kids and make ends meet
by painting rugs, Jo’s treasure-digging con offered a potential way to
feed the family. Here’s one example, from a neighbor named William
Stafford. According to Stafford, the Smiths 

> devised a scheme, by which they might satiate their hunger, with the
> mutton of one of my sheep. They had seen in my flock of sheep, a
> large, fat, black weather. Old Joseph and one of the boys came to me
> one day, and said that Joseph Jr. had discovered some very remarkable
> and valuable treasures, which could be procured only in one way. That
> way, was as follows: -- That a black sheep should be taken on to the
> ground where the treasures were concealed -- that after cutting its
> throat, it should be led around a circle while bleeding. This being
> done, the wrath of the evil spirit would be appeased: the treasures
> could then be obtained, and my share of them was to be four fold. To
> gratify my curiosity, I let them have a large fat sheep. They
> afterwards informed me, that the sheep was killed pursuant to
> commandment; but as there was some mistake in the process, it did not
> have the desired effect. This, I believe, is the only time they ever
> made money-digging a profitable business.

This language Stafford used here is super important. “Pursuant to
commandment” and the weather being black particularly are both important
ingredients to Christian occult magic. The lamb was to be used as the
scapegoat for cleansing the diggers of any sins. They’d cast their sins
into the weather, sacrifice it and spread its blood in a circle around
the location of buried treasure, thus binding the treasure and its
spirit guardian to the location long enough for them to unearth it and
cast the guardian spirit off from the treasure. This is deeply rooted in
Israelite Torah tradition of sacrificial offerings; they likely burned
the lamb as offering once it had been bled out and then consumed the
kosher meat.

D. Michael Quinn’s Early Mormonism and the Magic World View deals with
this synthesis of Christian beliefs and occult traditions.

> No known denunciation of the family ever used the phrase “faculty of
> Abrac,” even though Lucy Mack smith did. Neighbors accused Joseph Jr.
> and Sr. of practicing certain treasure-digging ceremonies, and it was
> Lucy Smith who used the phrase linking these accusations to ritual
> magic. Mormon historian Richard L. Bushman observed that thereby Lucy
> “revealed a knowledge of magic formulas and rituals.” One Palmyra
> resident reported that the prophet’s mother also performed various
> forms of magic divination, including palmistry… Marvin S. Hill has
> concluded: “In her mind magic circles, sooth saying, and other magical
> arts were one with her religious activities.”

Even the dagger they likely used in slitting the throat of the lamb had
magical significance. “the Hyrum Smith family has preserved as an
heirloom the kind of dagger necessary for ritual magic.” which Quinn
prints pictures of in his book, Early Mormonism and the Magic World
View. Today’s perspective of the occult being tied to satanism and evil
spirits is a modern perspective. The division between white and black
magic was closely observed by Jo and the family in order to be shown the
gift and power of god in all their endeavors. As we’ll see in coming
episodes, it becomes possible to come to all sorts of conclusions about
what god thinks is righteous or sinful when a person’s world view is
shaped by this kind of thinking.

For a lot of people, the question then becomes, did Jo really believe in
this magic or was it all a con? I think that’s a false dichotomy because
both can be true. He made his meager living from clearly conning people
with the hopes that one day the treasure they finally acquired would get
him rich. Enough failed digs, however, will produce more deliberate cons
to pay the bills. Produce enough deliberate cons and eventually they
must evolve, expand, and adapt to changing circumstances and wider
audiences; and thus, we see the blueprints of any religion right before
our natural eyes.

Understandably, these cons eventually exhaust themselves for want of
more credulous minds. If any con artist operates in a single location
for long enough, their reputation will eventually precede them and
business dries up because people talk to each other. As a result, the
Smiths gained a pretty low reputation in New York while hunting for
buried treasure under the cover of night.

There is no evidence that they actually found any treasure, making it
pretty obvious, at least to educated people, that this whole thing was
at worst a con, and at best a totally unproductive hobby. Notably as
well, although there isn’t any solid evidence of this occurring with the
Smith treasure diggers, buried treasure was a great way to launder
counterfeit money. An habitually destitute person walks into the local
shop with a bag of gold coins, people are going to be skeptical as to
where it came from. Found it while digging in the woods is a satisfying
explanation for a while and it may even motivate more folks to join the
group and fund treasure digs of their own. When those digs came up dry,
the conjuration was performed incorrectly and the dupe walks away with
their pockets lighter and the Smiths have a few meals paid for.
Accusations of counterfeit plagued Joseph Jr. for much of his public
life and contributed to his assassination in Carthage Jail in 1844.

Hard-working people who take the slow, hard way to wealth have always
looked at people who chase get-rich-quick schemes as lazy. Laziness
became a common description of Jo and other members of the Smith family.
A New York neighbor of the Smiths, Parley Chase, said in a sworn
affidavit dated December 13, 1833 “that not one of the male members of
the Smith family were entitled to any credit, whatsoever. They were
lazy, intemperate and worthless men, very much addicted to lying. In
this they frequently boasted of their skill. Digging for money was their
principal employment.” A March 20, 1834 affidavit signed by 11 New York
neighbors similarly said that the Smiths “were not only a lazy, indolent
set of men, but also intemperate; and their word was not to be depended
upon; and that we are truly glad to dispense with their society.” Henry
Harris’s affidavit, signed December 9, 1833, said the Smiths “were
regarded by the community in which they lived, as a lying and indolent
set of men and no confidence could be placed in them. William Riley Hine
said in an affidavit in the 1880s that he “heard a man say who was a
neighbor to the Mormon Smith family, in Palmyra, N.Y., that they were
thieves, indolent, the lowest and meanest family he ever saw or heard
of.”

A mail carrier who regularly passed through Palmyra on his way back and
forth from Canada to Kansas said in article published in the June 7,
1855 Texas Ranger, “\[I\] well remember of hearing frequently of the
pranks of ‘Lazy Joe.’” Even Lorenzo Saunders, who liked Jo and defended
him in a court of law and said the Smiths were great sugar makers, also
said in a November 12, 1884 interview that “Joseph Smith never did work.
They claim there in that book that Jo. Smith was a great worker. he was
a lazy dog, I tell you the truth.”

Indolence, intemperance, laziness, not to be depended upon, addicted to
lying. These are not resounding endorsements of Jo and the Smith family.
I would balance these accusations with other quotes from people around
the Smiths that state they were good people, temperate, kind, religious,
devout, anything… but those don’t exist. In fact, almost anybody
connected to the Smith family in the late 1810s into the late 1820s had
nothing but bad to say about Jo and the Smiths. I’m always happy to be
proven wrong and make corrections but after studying Jo’s early life
quite a bit, the dearth of public statements that had anything nice to
say about Jo is stark evidence of his character itself.

What follows this episode is a historical timeline in an attempt to
construct a narrative of Joseph Smith’s life with the documents we have
available to us. I want to commend the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints for the incredible amount of work they’ve done
digitizing documents from the Joseph Smith period of church history
through their Joseph Smith Paper’s project. If not for the availability
of these documents online, the job of collecting, analyzing, and
collating them into a coherent timeline would have been a significantly
more difficult endeavor.

That’s a brief introduction to the early life and history of Joseph
Smith. What follows in the backlog of this podcast is a progression of
the timeline from this point forward. Each episode is a scripted essay
researched, written, recorded, and produced by yours truly. To explain
what you’ll hear as you progress through the episodes, permit me a few
minutes to tell you a little about myself.

I grew up in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Utah. I
checked all the boxes of a young man born of goodly parents in the
church. Baptized at 8, priesthood at 12, patriarchal blessing at 14,
home teaching, passing sacrament, eagle scout, priesthood callings, the
whole gamut. I never much liked going to church but I had a solid
testimony that the church is true. At about the age of 15, my lethargy
for the high-demand church began to really sink in. A little after I
turned 16, I told my parents I didn’t want to go to church anymore and
they were okay with it. I have an older sister who’d stopped going to
church before me so my parents learned from her that it was best to let
me walk my own path, for which I’m forever grateful.

I graduated high school, went to a year of university at Weber State, go
Wildcats, and dropped out to enter the workforce. I moved out on my own
at the first possible moment and didn’t think much about religion or
belief in god. I had listened to enough George Carlin that I considered
all religions to be wrong and atheist was the best way to describe me. I
eventually got a job driving a truck around Northern Utah which resulted
in an epiphany, a story you’ll hear on the show eventually. From it, I
learned to enjoy everything. It didn’t matter what I was doing, I could
find joy in it; a philosophy to which I abide today.

While driving a truck for 10 hours a day, podcasts eventually supplanted
Chelsea Grin and White Chapel on repeat and I truly began to examine
faith, belief, and what motivates people to do what they do. After
hundreds of hours of debates, thousands of hours of podcasts during work
and leisure time, atheism became a badge I wore with pride instead of a
convenient label. During this journey of learning many faith traditions
and arguments for and against them, my own childhood faith remained
relatively untouched. I regarded Mormonism as the same nonsense as any
other religion, even though it was the religion in which I was raised.

Eventually, I stumbled on a few podcasts that talked about Mormon
history, which piqued my interest more than other similar deep-dives
into histories of other faiths. I looked for a podcast that was just
Mormon history, and there wasn’t one. This was 2011-2012, podcasting was
in an even more infantile state than it is in 2020 as I’m recording this
revised pilot episode. No podcast contained the information I sought so
I went the old-fashioned way of reading books, something I never did for
leisure my entire life prior to that point.

The more I read, the more I realized that Mormon history is wonderfully
fascinating. We don’t have documents about the foundations of
Christianity, Buddhism, Islam, or basically any other religion rooted in
ancient antiquity, but I was raised in a modern religion with extensive
documents written by its founding members. Mormon history became a rabid
fascination and I continued my search for the perfect Mormon history
podcast. It still didn’t exist. By autumn of 2014, I decided to make the
podcast I was looking for; my motivations were complex but also
simplistic compared with what continues to drive me today; and that
point brings us to what you can expect should you continue through the
backlog, dear listener.

When I started this podcast, I was in the process of learning about
Mormon culture and history at an exponential pace while dealing with my
own personal religious trauma. That fire raged in my heart, kept me
reading, writing, recording, and producing until late in the night while
simultaneously driving a truck for a living. I did my best to conceal my
personal biases and motivations in the first few episodes, but the more
I learned the more modern Mormon abuse came into focus and I couldn’t
discuss the history without discussing the culture and its impact on
myself and my loved ones. I began to see Mormons as victims of an
abusive and religiously coercive system from lowliest ward clerk to the
highest echelons of the Quorum of Apostles. I held absolutely nothing
back. To hold back those thoughts and commentary would be leaving a part
of me out of my work, my passion, my greatest creative endeavor.

As I continued to learn more, read more, absorb more, and eventually
attend Mormon history conferences like Sunstone, the John Whitmer
Historical Association, the Mormon History Association, the more I met
my academic heroes who write all the books and articles I voraciously
consume. Simply put, I matured. The firebrand, the anger, the trauma,
the wrongs by which I felt personally slighted, subsided. The fire that
once propelled me through 16-hour workdays and microwave meals evolved
to fascination.

I extended a plea to my listeners. I wanted them to hire me so my
day-job could become Mormon history instead of staring at the inside of
a windshield. They delivered. I’m so lucky to have the listeners I do
because I’m among the few people who gets to turn their passion into
their occupation. The episodes from that point forward reflect an
evolution of my writing and presentation style from angry ex-Mormon to a
history communicator with a massive body of academic literature from
which to create the serial Mormon history podcast. I also conducted lots
of interviews, met incredible people, attended and presented at
enlightening conferences across the nation, and honed my skills of
research and writing.

I’ve thrown around how much I want to rerecord all the early episodes,
but if I did, it would sanitize the experience I just described;
removing what’s made my journey through Mormon history what it is. The
evolution from angry ex-Mormon to polished researcher and presenter
would be lost and that’s a cost I’m not willing to sacrifice. This
podcast has been therapeutic to me and my inbox tells me it has been for
many others; I can’t deprive us all of what that cathartic journey
contains.

With that context in mind, here’s a breakdown of the backlog. Joseph
Smith’s early life is covered in episodes 1-16 roughly 1805-1829. The
Book of Mormon is published and the church founded with the New York era
spanning episodes 17-24 which is 1830. The most popular episode follows
episode 24 which is a 7.5 hour treatment of the Book of Mormon. That is
the longest episode but most episodes vary from 65-120 minutes. From
there, the Kirtland era of the church spans episodes 25-39 which
comprises 1831-37. The Missouri-Mormon War of 1838 is covered through
episodes 40-50. Episodes 51-214 cover the five years of Nauvoo history
1839-44, which really exemplifies how much more rigid and thorough my
own research practices have become over the 6 years of this podcast, as
well as the exponential complexity of Nauvoo history. Finally, episodes
215-224 are titled “Road to Carthage,” which, oddly enough, is a great
place to start listening to this podcast. Through that final 10-part
series of the podcast, I cover stories discussed throughout the entire
214 episodes leading to the death of Joseph Smith in Carthage Jail with
episode numbers. Think of the Road to Carthage series as essentially an
index of the podcast, which may be more suitable to those of you who
want a ton of Mormon history through 20 hours of 10 episodes instead of
250 hours of 224 episodes. Episode 223 is the Carthage gunfight itself
if you want to Tarantino the podcast by starting with the end and then
circling back to the start of it all. There are also some SpEdEp, or
Special Edition Episodes, usually featuring interviews with great
people. I also did a bit of advertising at various points, but realized
that time is best devoted to patrons of the show at
patreon.com/nakedmormonism. There’s a ton of extra content on that
patreon feed. Most episodes after episode 100 have extra content at the
end for patrons and there’s also early Mormon audiobooks with commentary
like Mormonism Unvailed, History of the Saints, An Address to all
Believers in Christ, Manuscript Story—Conneaut Creek, and a few others.
So, if you want to help employ me and keep my objectivity in Mormon
history communication, as well as find hours of extra content, that’s
patreon.com/nakedmormonism. I also encourage you to search for other
podcasts where I’ve done collaborations, Scathing Atheist, Cognitive
Dissonance, Latter-day Lesbian, Mormon Stories, From Priesthood to
Pretty, Wayward Willis, iFriends, The Thinking Atheist, and a litany of
others. I owe a debt of gratitude to all these wonderful podcast hosts
for helping me on this journey. I also cohost Glass Box Podcast doing
deep dives on the Mormon angle of current events and I was brought on My
Book of Mormon podcast to read through the Doctrine & Covenants, Mormon
scripture, to help provide historical context for each revelation. If
either of those topics interest you I’d encourage you to check them out
as well.

A couple final notes, the podcast contains nicknames for the most
prominent characters of Mormon history. This has served to be quite
divisive, but in my mind it’s a necessary story-telling mechanism. If I
asked you, what’s the difference between William Phelps, William Law,
and William Smith, could you answer that question with a few data points
about why they’re each important? But, if you ask a fan of the show the
difference between Double-dub Phelps, William Judas Law, and Crazy
Willey, they’ll instantly know who you’re talking about and why they’re
each important to the timeline. Having a nickname helps us construct a
mental image of the person and I’m excited for you to get acquainted
with Not-So-Smarty-Marty, Pistol Packin’ Porter, Bloody Brigham,
Professor Bill, Dibble Dabble, Piggy Bank Steve, Wreck-it Bennett, and
so many other fascinating figures of Mormon history. Also, in the early
episodes, I swear a lot. It’s a turnoff for a lot of people and around
episode 106 I eventually cut it out so I hope it won’t dissuade you from
continuing to hit the “next episode” button. In many ways, the evolution
of my language around that point is a microcosm of the evolution of my
research and writing style.

Final point and then I’ll let you go. As I’m recording this, I’m
beginning a hiatus following the Road to Carthage series. That’s to
devote some time to fulfilling the promise I made to my amazing
supporters to put my research into a book and get it published. It’s my
hope that by the time you’ve listened to the entire backlog, that book
examining the influence of psychedelics in early Mormonism will be at
some stage of completion, maybe it’ll even be on the shelves. Stick
around and together we’ll find out how my seventh year of rest resulted.

Thank you so much for taking the time to give this podcast a listen. I
know that was a lengthy introduction; you’ll soon understand that my
style is thoroughness with very little consideration to how much time it
requires. That’s my way of saying I’m an insufferable windbag. You can
contact me, Bryce Blankenagel, through email at
<nakedmormonism@gmail.com> or on all the social medias bearing Naked
Mormonism. I hope to talk at you next time, here, on the NMPC.
