---
layout: post
title: >
    SpEdEp 10 - ROT IN HELL Boyd K. Packer!!!
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/special-edition-episode-10-rot-hell-boyd-k-packer/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/spedep-10-rot-in-hell-boyd-k-packer
category: SpEdEp
date: 2015-07-30 18:28:39 PDT
---

SpEdEp 10 – ROT IN HELL\!\!\! Boyd K. Packer

Links:

# Talk to the All-Church Coordinating Council

http://www.zionsbest.com/face.html\#sthash.FcmORPAc.dpuf

Boyd K. Packer - The Mantle is Far, Far Greater than the Intellect (full
speech)

<https://si.lds.org/bc/seminary/content/library/talks/ces-symposium-addresses/the-mantle-is-far-far-greater-than-the-intellect_eng.pdf>

To Young Men Only Oct 2, 1976

https://www.lds.org/manual/to-young-men-only/to-young-men-only?lang=eng

This is a special edition episode on the life and ministry of Boyd K.
Packer. There are a lot of quotes from BKP circulating online that seem
like they might be out of touch, or somewhat bigotted or closed off.
Well, these are single quotes, taken from massive talks and lectures at
General Conference, or firesides, or other speaking engagements he's
performed during his career in the church. Well, the quotes we see may
be entertaining, or surprising, or might get a quick laugh, just
thinking about how disconnected from the real world the quote is, but
unfortunately for us all, they are often taken out of context. I've
spent the last week and a half reading a different talk from BKP every
night, to compile the script for this episode. I'll be honest, this has
been a very rage filled week and a half for me. It's hard to explain,
but I feel closer to BKP than I ever thought I possibly could, and
waaaay closer than I ever wanted to be. Some of the things that come
from the mind of this man have made me yell "FUCK YOU\!\!" at my
computer screen, others have made me try to physically pull my hair out
of my skull, while others have left me completely speechless jaw
clenched, shaking my head in disbelief. A small portion have made me
simply laugh in hysterical disbelief. I thought that some of the
one-liner quotes that spawned this research, would be mired in huge
diatribes about how wonderful the church is, but the more I read, the
more I started to see the real picture. 

I think the most infuriating thing about the talks, was the
anti-intellectual, and anti-questioning undertones in almost every
fucking line he spat. I may have been taking the talks too personally,
but almost everything he said seemed like he was talking down to any
person that is stupid enough to question the church, spirit, prophets,
history, or their own testimony. One main line I kept yelling over and
over was, "If your fucking church is actually true, than scholarship and
honest study should help it, not diminish people's faith in it\!", or
something along those lines. 

And that's the crux of it. That's the entire problem with the church,
it's fear of honest inquiry, and real scrutiny. Everything has to be
tainted with a presumption of the church being true, before inquiry can
begin. Anything that's learned about the church, that doesn't seem to be
in line with the rosey, wonderful doctrine and history that the church
itself projects, isn't even worth mentioning, talking about, or paying
attention to. If a believing member gives one second of thought to
critical scrutiny of some information they learn, they are either forced
to swallow the church's version of it, or fall into the same obscurity
as apostates, because that's where real inquiry always leads. 

How can the church question why members are leaving in droves? The
people are sick and exhausted of being told their questions don't need
to be answered, or that they're asking the wrong kind of question. If a
member, especially one of prominence, gives a speech that doesn't fall
in line with the cardboard narrative that the church tries to hold up,
they are corrected. That correction can mean any number of things from a
condescending talking-to, all the way up to a full on excommunication,
depending on how blasphemous it was. And just think about that for a
minute. Blasphemy. Something that has historically been treated with
beheadings, or exile, and is now treated with bespiritings, and forced
apostasy. Blasphemy.... A perfectly victimless crime. The simple
excercise of free speech against an oppressive power, usually religious
in nature, blasphemy.... It's the motherfucker of all sins. 

If you pay attention to Mormon news, look at John Dehlin, and Kate
Kelly. The two most recent vocal dissenters of church doctrine, and
stances on history, womens rights, and other challenging church topics,
and they were excommunicated for just speaking out. Blasphemy is one
small tool that the oppressed have against their oppressors, and we're
lucky enough to live in a time and place where it won't get your head
cut off, or your hands and feet nailed to some wood, or your body burned
at the stake. The only real consequence of open blasphemy nowdays
against the Mormon church is a complete cutoff from your friends,
family, business acquaintences, and condescending neighbors. 

I feel like I've overextended the vitriol I usually contain in my rants,
but I'm trying to convey just how pissed off reading these talks made
me. It felt like I was 15 again, stuck inside for 4 hours, watching
general conference on a beautiful April Saturday, being told that I'm a
worthless sinner, and separated from God unless I stop masturbating,
repent, and get back on track to go on my mission again. I haven't felt
these emotions in a very long time. I've done nearly countless hours of
research for this podcast, and have never had my blood boiling this much
from a single topic. So, I've decided to do this episode a little
differently. Instead of scripting everything like usual, I'm just going
to read massive chunks from talks that Boyd K. Butt-fucking Fudge Packer
has given in the past, and comment on the fly. Most of this episode will
be just reading pieces from the talks, because I want Fudge
Pack-it-in-there-farther to speak for himself. I hope that no listeners
have any strong ties to Boyd K. Butt-Pucker, because I have no problem
speaking ill of the recently deceased when they were such a piece of
biggotted dogshit, that oppressed and silenced so many people in their
lifetime. People that did nothing but ask for help, or raise legitimate
questions. Every one of them were squashed, or cut off like a common
genital wart. Hopefully, by the end of this episode, you as the listener
will empathize with the title of this episode, as it was literally the
only phrase that could bring some level of appreciation to my exploding
brain, while I was reading these disgustingly fucked up speeches. 

Boyd K. Packer - The Mantle is Far, Far Greater than the Intellect BYU
CES August 22, 1981

This problem has affected some of those who have taught and have written
about the history of the Church. These professors say of themselves that
religious faith has little influence on Mormon scholars. They say this
because, obviously, they are not simply Latter-day Saints but are also
intellectuals trained, for the most part, in secular institutions. They
would that some historians who are Latter-day Saints write history as
they were taught in graduate school, rather than as Mormons. 

First Caution: There is no such thing as an accurate, objective history
of the Church without consideration of the spiritual powers that attend
this work. There is no such thing as a scholarly, objective study of the
office of bishop without consideration of spiritual guidance, of
discernment, and of revelation. That is not scholarship. Accordingly, I
repeat, there is no such thing as an accurate or objective history of
the Church which ignores the Spirit 

Those of us who are extensively engaged in researching the wisdom of
man, including those who write and those who teach Church history, are
not immune from these dangers. I have walked that road of scholarly
research and study and know something of the dangers. If anything, we
are more vulnerable than those in some of the other disciplines. Church
history can be so interesting and so inspiring as to be a very powerful
tool indeed for building faith. If not properly written or properly
taught, it may be a faith destroyer. 

Second Caution: There is a temptation for the writer or the teacher of
Church history to want to tell everything, whether it is worthy or faith
promoting or not. Some things that are true are not very useful.
Historians seem to take great pride in publishing something new,
particularly if it illustrates a weakness or mistake of a prominent
historical figure. For some reason, historians and novelists seem to
savor such things. If it related to a living person, it would come under
the heading of gossip. History can be as misleading as gossip and much
more difficult—often impossible—to verify. 

The scriptures teach emphatically that we must give milk before meat.
The Lord made it very clear that some things are to be taught
selectively, and some things are to be given only to those who are
worthy. It matters very much not only what we are told but when we are
told it. Be careful that you build faith rather than destroy it.
President William E. Berrett has told us how grateful he is that a
testimony that the past leaders of the Church were prophets of God was
firmly fixed in his mind before he was exposed to some of the so-called
facts that historians have put in their published writings. 

What that historian did with the reputation of the President of the
Church was not worth doing. He seemed determined to convince everyone
that the prophet was a man. We knew that already. All of the prophets
and all of the Apostles have been men. It would have been much more
worthwhile for him to have convinced us that the man was a prophet, a
fact quite as true as the fact that he was a man. 

The sad thing is that he may have, in years past, taken great interest
in those who led the Church and desired to draw close to them. But
instead of following that long, steep, discouraging, and occasionally
dangerous path to spiritual achievement, instead of going up to where
they were, he devised a way of collecting mistakes and weaknesses and
limitations to compare with his own. In that sense he has attempted to
bring a historical figure down to his level and in that way feel close
to him and perhaps justify his own weaknesses. 

That historian or scholar who delights in pointing out the weakness and
frailties of present or past leaders destroys faith. A destroyer of
faith—particularly one within the Church, and more particularly one who
is employed specifically to build faith—places himself in great
spiritual jeopardy. He is serving the wrong master, and unless he
repents, he will not be among the faithful in the eternities. 

Third Caution: In an effort to be objective, impartial, and scholarly, a
writer or a teacher may unwittingly be giving equal time to the
adversary. Someone told of the man who entitled his book An Unbiased
History of the Civil War from the Southern Point of View. While we
chuckle at that, there is something to be said about presenting Church
history from the viewpoint of those who have righteously lived it. The
idea that we must be neutral and argue quite as much in favor of the
adversary as we do in favor of righteousness is neither reasonable nor
safe. 

In the Church we are not neutral. We are one-sided. There is a war going
on, and we are engaged in it. It is the war between good and evil, and
we are belligerents defending the good. We are therefore obliged to give
preference to and protect all that is represented in the gospel of Jesus
Christ, and we have made covenants to do it. 

There is much in the scriptures and in our Church literature to convince
us that we are at war with the adversary. We are not obliged as a
church, nor are we as members obliged, to accommodate the enemy in this
battle. 

We should not be ashamed to be committed, to be converted, to be biased
in favor of the Lord. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out the
fallacy of trying to work both sides of the street: “You may as well say
that the Book of Mormon is not true because it does not give credence to
the story the Lamanites told of the Nephites” (Utah Genealogical and
Historical Magazine, Apr. 1925, p. 55). 

A number of years ago, professors from Harvard University who were
members of the Church invited me to lunch over at the Harvard Business
School faculty dining room. They wanted to know if I would join them in
participating in a new publication; they wanted me to contribute to it.
© 1981 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in
the USA CES Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History •
22 August 1981 • Elder Boyd K. Packer They were generous in their
compliments, saying that because I had a doctorate a number of people in
the Church would listen to me, and being a General Authority (at that
time I was an Assistant to the Twelve), I could have some very useful
influence. I listened to them very attentively but indicated at the
close of the conversation that I would not join them. I asked to be
excused from responding to their request. When they asked why, I told
them this: “When your associates announced the project, they described
how useful it would be to the Church—a niche that needed to be filled.
And then the spokesman said, ‘We are all active and faithful members of
the Church; however, . . .’” I told my two hosts that if the
announcement had read, “We are active and faithful members of the
Church; therefore, . . .” I would have joined their organization. I had
serious questions about a “however” organization. I have little worry
over a “therefore” organization. That however meant that they put a
condition upon their Church membership and their faith. It meant that
they put something else first. It meant that they were to judge the
Church and gospel and the leaders of it against their own backgrounds
and training. It meant that their commitment was partial, and that
partial commitment is not enough to qualify one for full spiritual light

Fourth Caution The final caution concerns the idea that so long as
something is already in print, so long as it is available from another
source, there is nothing out of order in using it in writing or speaking
or teaching. Surely you can see the fallacy in that. 

Several years ago President Ezra Taft Benson spoke to you and said: “It
has come to our attention that some of our teachers, particularly in our
university programs, are purchasing writings from known apostates . . .
in an effort to become informed about certain points of view or to glean
from their research. You must realize that when you purchase their
writings or subscribe to their periodicals, you help sustain their
cause. (Mark Hoffman)

There are qualifications to teach or to write the history of this
church. If one is lacking in any one of these qualifications, he cannot
properly teach the history of the Church. He can recite facts and give a
point of view, but he cannot properly teach the history of the Church. I
will state these qualifications in the form of questions so that you can
assess your own qualifications. Do you believe that God the Father and
His Son Jesus Christ personally appeared to the boy prophet, Joseph
Smith, Jr., in the year 1820? Do you have personal witness that the
Father and the Son appeared in all their glory and stood above that
young man and instructed him according to the testimony that he gave to
the world in his published history? Do you know that the Prophet Joseph
Smith’s testimony is true because you have received a spiritual witness
of its truth? Do you believe that the church that was restored through
him is, in the Lord’s words, “the only true and living church upon the
face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased” (D\&C
1:30)? Do you know by the Holy Ghost that this is the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints restored by heavenly messengers in this
modern era; that the Church constitutes the kingdom of God on earth, not
just an institution fabricated by human agency? Do you believe that the
successors to the Prophet Joseph Smith were and are prophets, seers, and
revelators; that revelation from heaven directs the decisions, policies,
and pronouncements that come from the headquarters of the Church? Have
you come to the settled conviction, by the Spirit, that these prophets
truly represent the Lord? 

Now a final lesson from Church history, one that illustrates the kind of
thing from the past that builds faith and increases testimony. William
W. Phelps had been a trusted associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
Then, in an hour of crisis when the Prophet needed him most, he turned
against him and joined the apostates and oppressors who sought the
Prophet’s life. Later, Brother Phelps came to himself. He repented of
what he had done and wrote to the Prophet Joseph Smith, asking for his
forgiveness. I want to read you the letter the Prophet Joseph wrote to
Brother Phelps in reply. I confess also that many times I have moaned in
agony when I have thought of the many incidents of this kind that
researchers have discovered when they have pored over the records of our
history but have left them out of their writings for fear they would be
regarded as not worthy of a scholarly review of Church history. Now the
letter. “Dear Brother Phelps: . . . “You may in some measure realize
what my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon’s and Brother Hyrum’s were,
when we read your letter—truly our hearts were melted into tenderness
and compassion when we ascertained your resolves, \&c. I can assure you
I feel a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the
approbation of Jehovah, (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the
principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed; and
inasmuch as long-suffering, patience, and mercy have ever characterized
the dealings of our heavenly Father towards the humble and penitent, I
feel disposed to copy the example, cherish the same principles, and by
so doing be a savior of my fellow men. “It is true, that we have
suffered much in consequence of your behavior—the cup of gall, already
full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when
you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel
together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord—‘had it been
an enemy, we could have borne it.’. . . “However, the cup has been
drunk, the will of our Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for
which we thank the Lord. And having been delivered from the hands of
wicked men by the mercy of our God, we say it is your privilege to be
delivered from the powers of the adversary, be brought into the liberty
of God’s dear children, and again take your stand among the Saints of
the Most High, and by diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend
yourself to our God, and your God, and to the Church of Jesus Christ.
“Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine, I
shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and
rejoice over the returning prodigal. . . . “Come on, dear brother, since
the war is past, “For friends at first, are friends again at last.
“Yours as ever, “Joseph Smith, Jun.” (History of the Church,
4:162–64.) Brother Phelps did return to full fellowship. He was a
writer of hymns. The one we sang to open this meeting, 11 © 1981 by
Intellectual Reserve, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the USA CES
Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History • 22 August
1981 • Elder Boyd K. Packer “Praise to the Man,” was written by Brother
Phelps, as were “O God, the Eternal Father,” “Now Let Us Rejoice,”
“Gently Raise the Sacred Strain,” “The Spirit of God Like a Fire”—to
mention but a few. 

To you who may have lost your way, come back\! We know how that can
happen; we have walked that path of research and study. Come help
us\!—you with your scholarship and your training, you with your
bright, intelligent minds, you with your experience and with your
academic degrees. 

May God bless you who so faithfully compile and teach the history of the
Church and build the faith of those you teach. I bear witness that the
gospel is true. The Church is His church. I pray that you may be
inspired as you write and as you teach. May His Spirit be with you in
rich abundance. As you take your students over the trails of Church
history in this dispensation, yours is the privilege to help them to see
the miracle of the Restoration, the mantle that belongs to His servants,
and to “see in every hour and in every moment of the existence of the
Church . . . the overruling, almighty hand of \[God\]” (Joseph F. Smith,
in Conference Report, Apr. 1904, p. 2). As you write and as you teach
Church history under the influence of His Spirit, one day you will come
to know that you were not only spectators but a central part of it, for
you are His Saints. This testimony I leave, with my blessings, in the
name of Jesus Christ. Amen. 

# Talk to the All-Church Coordinating Council

Thirty-eight years ago I came from Brigham City to the office I now
occupy in the Administration Building to see Elder Harold B. Lee, who,
next to President Joseph Fielding Smith, was the senior member of the
Quorum of the Twelve. I had just been appointed the supervisor of
Seminaries and Institutes of Religion. I knew there were serious
problems in the system and I wondered why they had not appointed someone
with more experience.

Elder Lee had agreed to give me counsel and some direction. He didn't
say much, nothing really in detail, but what he told me has saved me
time and time again. "You must decide now which way you face," he said.
"Either you represent the teachers and students and champion their
causes or you represent the Brethren who appointed you. You need to
decide now which way you face." Then he added, "Some of your
predecessors faced the wrong way." It took some hard and painful lessons
before I understood his counsel. In time, I did understand, and my
resolve to face the right way became irreversible.

One of the early lessons was also my first lesson in correlation. The
seminaries were sponsoring speech contests. They were very successful --
much better than similar contests sponsored by the Mutual Improvement
Association. It was an ideal gospel-centered activity for seminaries.
They were succeeding beautifully under able teachers who could assist
even the shy students. We were instructed to discontinue them\!

There was something of an uprising among the teachers. They accused
Superintendent Curtis of the Young Men and President Reeder of the Young
Women of being responsible. Perhaps they were. The teachers wanted
Brother Tuttle and me to plead their cause before the Brethren. The
logic was all on our side. Nevertheless we remembered the counsel of
Brother Lee, and really, just out of obedience, we declined.

Later I could see that the seminaries served then only a very small part
of our youth; the MIA, all of them. A B-minus program reaching most of
the youth would, in the aggregate, bring better results than an A-plus
program which reached relatively few. It wasn't until many years later,
when some other problems arose, that I could see that those contests,
even though they were gospel centered, pulled the teachers into an
activity-oriented mind-set and away from the less exciting
responsibility of teaching the Old and New Testaments to teenagers.
Finally I could see that the very success of the program was an enemy.

Other lessons followed, some of them hard ones. I was asked to write an
article for the Improvement Era. It was returned with the request that I
change some words. I smarted\! The replacement words didn't convey
exactly what I was trying to say. I balked a bit, and was told that
Richard L. Evans, then of the Seventy and magazine editor, had asked
that the changes be made. I remembered Brother Lee's counsel. I had to
submit. Now, though that article is piled under thirty-five years of
paper, I'm glad, very glad, that if someone digs it out, I was "invited"
to change it. 

Only last Friday while putting together some things for a presentation,
I read part of it to some brethren from BYU. I noticed they looked at
one another at one place in my reading, and I stopped and asked if there
was a problem. Finally one of them suggested that I not use a certain
scripture that I had included even though it said exactly what I wanted
to convey. How dare they suppose that a member of the Twelve didn't know
his scriptures\! I simply said, "What do you suggest?" He said, "Better
find another scripture," and he pointed out that if I put that verse
back in context, it was really talking about another subject. Others had
used it as I proposed to use it, but it was not really correct. I was
very glad to make a change. 

Now you may not need a correlating hand in what you do, but I certainly
do. This brother lingered after the meeting to thank me for being
patient with him. Thank me\! I was thankful to him. If I ever make that
presentation, it will only be after some of our Correlation staff have
checked it over for me.

Now I give you all full credit for knowing more about your work than
anyone else -- more, certainly than the staff of the Correlation
Department. That is how it should be, for you are hired or called to be
a specialist. I also know from experience how easy it is to get turned
around, and, as Brother Lee warned, to face the wrong way.

The principle of correlation is a sound principle. Except for its having
been established, we could not now possibly administer an ever-growing
multi-national and multi-lingual church. The full purpose for its having
been established, I know, is yet to be realized. If we neglect it, we
will pay a very, very heavy price one day. The value of having struggled
through those years, and there aren't many around who struggled through
those years, will one day be apparent. The greatest use of this is yet
to come. 

It is so easy to be turned about without realizing that it has happened
to us. There are three areas where members of the Church, influenced by
social and political unrest, are being caught up and led away. I chose
these three because they have made major invasions into the membership
of the Church. In each, the temptation is for us to turn about and face
the wrong way, and it is hard to resist, for doing it seems so
reasonable and right.

The dangers I speak of come from the gay-lesbian movement, the feminist
movement (both of which are relatively new), and the ever-present
challenge from the so-called scholars or intellectuals. Our local
leaders must deal with all three of them with ever-increasing frequency.
In each case, the members who are hurting have the conviction that the
Church somehow is doing something wrong to members or that the Church is
not doing enough for them. To illustrate, I will quote briefly from
letters on each of those subjects. They are chosen from among many
letters which have arrived in the last few weeks. These have arrived in
just the last few days.

## The Gay/Lesbian Challenge

The first is from a young man, possibly a gay rights activist:

"May 3rd marks my 18th year in the Church. As a gay Mormon, I have
witnessed and experienced first-hand during those eighteen years what
it's like to be a homosexual in a Church which is sometimes less than
accepting of its gay members. My experiences have run the range from
incredible, Spirit-filled and loving encounters with members, Bishops
and Stake Presidents to a laughable run-in with a departing Mission
President. May I share with you some of the more permanent and
meaningful memories?"

After a page or two of those, he said:

"So in a spirit of friendship I offer that which I have to give -- the
life experience of a gay Mormon. At your convenience I would be happy to
meet with you to discuss the issues facing gay Latter-day Saints and the
Church. The purpose for meeting is not to debate, or to presumptively
call you to repentance, or to be called to repentance myself for being
gay. The point is to meet together and share what we have for the good
of The Kingdom and the furthering of the Will of the Lord on Earth."

## The Feminist Movement

The next quotation is from a woman who is hurting, and perhaps wonders
if anyone but the feminists care about her problems:

"I'm upset that I was always advised to go back and try harder only to
get abused more. I need some comfort, I need solace, need hope, need to
know Heavenly Father sees all that I have endured. What hope do I have
for a chance to live with Heavenly Father? If temple marriage is the key
to the celestial \[kingdom\], where am I? Outside gnashing my teeth for
eternity? Help me."

## The Scholars

The last is from a self-described intellectual:

"My concern is that the Brethren are contending with the church's own
scholars. ... In the Catholic Church, the great scholars' efforts were
used by the Church to refine and strengthen the doctrine (St. Augustine,
Thomas Aquinas, for example). In our Church, the scholars are put down,
even banished \[and he names three of them, and they would be names all
of whom you would know\]. Once again I extend an offer to you to be a
peacemaker between the Brethren and the scholars, if you wish me to
attempt it, since I know so many in both groups. More than that, I
understand the mind-sets of both groups."

These letters and hundreds more are from members who are hurting or
leaders who are worried. I might say here that I can see in the last few
weeks a change in the letters coming in. There isn't time to talk about
it now, but out in the Church there is another growing group of the
discontented. That is the rank and file who are trying to do what they
are supposed to do and feel neglected as we concentrate on solving the
problems of the exceptions.

Those who are hurting think they are not understood. They are looking
for a champion, an advocate, someone with office and influence from whom
they can receive comfort. They ask us to speak about their troubles in
general conference, to put something in the curriculum, or to provide a
special program to support them in their problems or with their
activism.

When members are hurting, it is so easy to convince ourselves that we
are justified, even duty bound, to use the influence of our appointment
or our calling to somehow represent them. We then become their advocates
-- sympathize with their complaints against the Church, and perhaps even
soften the commandments to comfort them. Unwittingly we may turn about
and face the wrong way. Then the channels of revelation are reversed.
Let me say that again. Then the channels of revelation are reversed. In
our efforts to comfort them, we lose our bearings and leave that segment
of the line to which we are assigned unprotected.

Those fifteen words from Alma state: "God gave unto them commandments,
after having made known to them the plan of redemption." There are many
things that cannot be understood nor taught nor explained unless it is
in terms of the plan of redemption. The three areas that I mentioned are
among them. Unless they understand the basic plan -- the premortal
existence, the purposes of life, the fall, the atonement, the
resurrection -- unless they understand that, the unmarried, the abused,
the handicapped, the abandoned, the addicted, the disappointed, those
with gender disorientation, or the intellectuals will find no enduring
comfort. They can't think life is fair unless they know the plan of
redemption.

That young man with gender disorientation needs to know that gender was
not assigned at mortal birth, that we were sons and daughters of God in
the premortal state.

The woman pleading for help needs to see the eternal nature of things
and to know that her trials -- however hard to bear -- in the eternal
scheme of things may be compared to a very, very bad experience in the
second semester of the first grade. She will find no enduring peace in
the feminist movement. There she will have no hope. If she knows the
plan of redemption, she can be filled with hope.

The one who supposes that he "understands the mind-set of both groups"
needs to understand that the doctrines of the gospel are revealed
through the Spirit to prophets, not through the intellect to scholars.

"God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the
plan of redemption." We face invasions of the intensity and seriousness
that we have not faced before. There is the need now to be united with
everyone facing the same way. Then the sunlight of truth, coming over
our shoulders, will mark the path ahead. If we perchance turn the wrong
way, we will shade our eyes from that light and we will fail in our
ministries.

God grant that a testimony of the redemption and knowledge of the
doctrine will be so fundamentally in our minds and in our hearts that we
will move forward with his approval. This Church will prevail. There is
no power in existence that can thwart the work in which we are engaged.
Of that I bear witness, and of him who is our redeemer I bear witness in
the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

# 

# To Young Men Only

<span id="anchor"></span>There are present in this priesthood session
only brethren. I approach a subject that could not appropriately be
discussed if there were others present. I have prayed fervently for
inspiration as I speak to young men of Aaronic Priesthood age: to young
men only.

<span id="anchor-1"></span>I wish to discuss a subject that fathers
should discuss with their sons. Because some young men do not have
fathers and because some fathers (and some bishops) do not know how to
proceed, I approach a very personal subject, one that is important to
every young man.

<span id="anchor-2"></span>You have been given a mortal body with which
to experience earth life. Through it you will be tested. Your body is
the instrument of your mind and the foundation of your character. It has
within it powers which, if properly used, will contribute greatly to
your exaltation. If you use this gift worthily, it will serve you
throughout all eternity.

<span id="anchor-3"></span>Never be ashamed of your body. No two are
just alike. Some young men worry because they think their body is not
well proportioned. They think they are too short or too tall or too
stout or too thin or too something else. Physical proportions need have
little to do with success, particularly spiritual success. Be grateful
for your body.

<span id="anchor-4"></span>Strive to keep it healthy through proper
nourishment, rest, and exercise. Develop your body to full and useful
capacity. Develop manly stamina and control. Take nothing into your body
that would harm it. Do not use tobacco, alcohol, drugs, or any other
harmful substance.

<span id="anchor-5"></span>A young man should learn to rule his body.
Like his temper, he should keep it always under complete control. That
sometimes is not easy to do.

<span id="anchor-6"></span>Within your body you have the power of
creation. You will one day find a mate and desire greatly to express
fully your love with her. The righteous expression of this physical love
in marriage is approved of the Lord. She then may conceive and give
birth to a boy or a girl, a baby of whom you will be the father.

This is a very sacred power. The Lord has commanded that you use it only
with one to whom you are legally and lawfully wedded. He has decreed
serious penalties indeed for the misuse of it. 

<span id="anchor-7"></span>This physical power will influence you
emotionally and spiritually as well. It begins to shape and fit you to
look, and feel, and to be what you need to be as a father. Ambition,
courage, physical and emotional and spiritual strength become part of
you because you are a man. You become very interested in young women—and
want to be with them. This is as it should be.

<span id="anchor-8"></span>This power of creation affects your life
several years before you should express it fully. You must always guard
the power with manly wisdom. You must wait until the time of your
marriage to use it.

<span id="anchor-9"></span>During that waiting, what do you do with
these desires? My boy, you are to control them. You are forbidden to use
them now in order that you may use them with worthiness and virtue and
fulness of joy at the proper time in life.

<span id="anchor-10"></span>I wish to explain something that will help
you understand your young manhood and help you develop self-control.
When this power begins to form, it might be likened to having a little
factory in your body, one designed to produce the product that can
generate life.

<span id="anchor-11"></span>This little factory moves quietly into
operation as a normal and expected pattern of growth and begins to
produce the life-giving substance. It will do so perhaps as long as you
live. It works very slowly. That is the way it should be. For the most
part, unless you tamper with it, you will hardly be aware that it is
working at all.

<span id="anchor-12"></span>As you move closer to manhood, this little
factory will sometimes produce an oversupply of this substance. The Lord
has provided a way for that to be released. It will happen without any
help or without any resistance from you. Perhaps, one night you will
have a dream. In the course of it the release valve that controls the
factory will open and release all that is excess.

<span id="anchor-13"></span>The factory and automatic release work on
their own schedule. The Lord intended it to be that way. It is to
regulate itself. This will not happen very often. You may go a longer
period of time, and there will be no need for this to occur. When it
does, you should not feel guilty. It is the nature of young manhood and
is part of becoming a man.

<span id="anchor-14"></span>There is, however, something you should not
do. Sometimes a young man does not understand. Perhaps he is encouraged
by unwise or unworthy companions to tamper with that factory. He might
fondle himself and open that release valve. This you should not do, for
if you do that, the little factory will speed up. You will then be
tempted again and again to release it. You can quickly be subjected to a
habit, one that is not worthy, one that will leave you feeling depressed
and feeling guilty. Resist that temptation. Do not be guilty of
tampering or playing with this sacred power of creation. Keep it in
reserve for the time when it can be righteously employed.

<span id="anchor-15"></span>You may already have been guilty of
tampering with these powers. You may even have developed a habit. What
do you do then?

<span id="anchor-16"></span>First, I want you to know this. If you are
struggling with this temptation and perhaps you have not quite been able
to resist, the Lord still loves you. It is not anything so wicked nor is
it a transgression so great that the Lord would reject you because of
it, but it can quickly lead to that kind of transgression. It is not
pleasing to the Lord, nor is it pleasing to you. It does not make you
feel worthy or clean.

<span id="anchor-17"></span>There are ways to conquer such a habit.
First of all, you must leave that factory alone long enough for it to
slow down. Resisting is not easy. It will take weeks, even months. But
you can get the little factory slowed back to where it should be.

<span id="anchor-18"></span>I have other suggestions. The power to
prevent such habits or to break them rests in your mind, not in your
body. Don’t let that physical part of you take charge. Stay in control.
Condition your body to do the will of your mind. To do this you must
keep your mind on worthy thoughts. Divert your thoughts from things that
lead you into mischief. Vigorous physical exercise helps young men in
many ways. You are most vulnerable when you are idle or when you are
discouraged. This is the time to be on guard.

<span id="anchor-19"></span>I know a way to keep your thoughts worthy.
It has helped me, and I explained it on one occasion in a general
conference talk. Let me repeat it for you.

<span id="anchor-20"></span>Probably the greatest challenge to people of
any age, particularly young people, and the most difficult thing you
will face in mortal life is to learn to control your thoughts. As a man
“thinketh in his heart, so is he.”
([Proverbs 23:7](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/ot/prov/23.7?lang=eng#6).)
One who can control his thoughts has conquered himself.

<span id="anchor-21"></span>I had been told a hundred times or more as I
grew up, that thoughts must be controlled, but no one told me how. I
want to tell you young people about one way you can learn to control
your thoughts, and it has to do with music.

<span id="anchor-22"></span>The mind is like a stage. Except when we are
asleep, the curtain is always up. There is always some act being
performed on that stage. It may be a comedy, a tragedy, interesting or
dull, good or bad; but always there is some act playing on the stage of
the mind.

<span id="anchor-23"></span>Have you noticed that without any real
intent on your part, in the middle of almost any performance, a shady
little thought may creep in from the wings and attract your attention?
These delinquent thoughts will try to upstage everybody. If you permit
them to go on, all thoughts of any virtue will leave the stage. You will
be left, because you consented to it, to the influence of unrighteous
thoughts.

<span id="anchor-24"></span>If you yield to them, they will enact for
you on the stage of your mind anything to the limits of your toleration.
They may enact a theme of bitterness, jealousy, or hatred. It may be
vulgar, immoral, even depraved. When they have the stage, if you let
them, they will devise the most clever persuasions to hold your
attention. They can make it interesting all right, even convince you
that it is innocent—for they are but thoughts.

<span id="anchor-25"></span>What do you do at a time like that, when the
stage of your mind is commandeered by the imps of unclean thinking,
whether they be the gray ones that seem almost clean or the filthy ones
which leave no room for doubt? If you can control your thoughts, you can
overcome habits, even degrading personal habits. If you can learn to
master them, you will have a happy life.

<span id="anchor-26"></span>This is what I would teach you. Choose from
among the sacred music of the Church a favorite hymn, one with words
that are uplifting and music that is reverent, one that makes you feel
something akin to inspiration. Go over it in your mind carefully.
Memorize it. Even though you have had no musical training, you can think
through a hymn.

<span id="anchor-27"></span>Now, use this hymn as the place for your
thoughts to go. Make it your emergency channel. Whenever you find these
shady actors have slipped from the sidelines of your thinking onto the
stage of your mind, put on this record, as it were. As the music begins
and as the words form in your thoughts, the unworthy ones will slip
shamefully away. It will change the whole mood on the stage of your
mind. Because it is uplifting and clean, the baser thoughts will
disappear. For while virtue, by choice, will not associate with filth,
evil cannot tolerate the presence of light.

<span id="anchor-28"></span>Another thing will help both to prevent and
to overcome such habits. At times of special temptation skip a meal or
two. We call that fasting, you know. It has a powerful effect upon you
physically. It diverts some of that physical energy to more ordinary
needs. It tempers desire and reduces the temptation. Fasting will help
you greatly.

<span id="anchor-29"></span>In the scriptures, fasting and prayer are
generally mentioned together. Prayer is a powerful instrument to bless
young men. If a missionary, for instance, indulges in these unworthy
practices, the Spirit of the Lord will leave him. When he is prayerful
and will fast, the Spirit of the Lord sustains him. He soon develops a
manly restraint and worthiness.

<span id="anchor-30"></span>Resist those temptations. Do not tamper with
your body. If you have already, cease to do it—now. Put it away and
overcome it. The signal of worthy manhood is self-control.

<span id="anchor-31"></span>This power is ordained for the begetting of
life and as a binding tie in the marriage covenant. It is not to be
misused. It is not to be used prematurely. It is to be known between
husband and wife and in no other way. If you misuse it, you will be
sorry.

<span id="anchor-32"></span>Now a warning\! I am hesitant to even
mention it, for it is not pleasant. It must be labeled as major
transgression. But I will speak plainly. There are some circumstances in
which young men may be tempted to handle one another, to have contact
with one another physically in unusual ways. Latter-day Saint young men
are not to do this.

<span id="anchor-33"></span>Sometimes this begins in a moment of idle
foolishness, when boys are just playing around. But it is not
foolishness. It is remarkably dangerous. Such practices, however
tempting, are perversion. When a young man is finding his way into
manhood, such experiences can misdirect his normal desires and pervert
him not only physically but emotionally and spiritually as well.

<span id="anchor-34"></span>It was intended that we use this power only
with our partner in marriage. I repeat, very plainly, physical mischief
with another man is forbidden. It is forbidden by the Lord.

<span id="anchor-35"></span>There are some men who entice young men to
join them in these immoral acts. If you are ever approached to
participate in anything like that, it is time to vigorously resist.

<span id="anchor-36"></span>While I was in a mission on one occasion, a
missionary said he had something to confess. I was very worried because
he just could not get himself to tell me what he had done.

<span id="anchor-37"></span>After patient encouragement he finally
blurted out, “I hit my companion.”

<span id="anchor-38"></span>“Oh, is that all,” I said in great relief.

<span id="anchor-39"></span>“But I floored him,” he said.

<span id="anchor-40"></span>After learning a little more, my response
was “Well, thanks. Somebody had to do it, and it wouldn’t be well for a
General Authority to solve the problem that way.”

<span id="anchor-41"></span>I am not recommending that course to you,
but I am not omitting it. You must protect yourself.

<span id="anchor-42"></span>There is a falsehood that some are born with
an attraction to their own kind, with nothing they can do about it. They
are just “that way” and can only yield to those desires. That is a
malicious and destructive lie. While it is a convincing idea to some, it
is of the devil. No one is locked into that kind of life. From our
premortal life we were directed into a physical body. There is no
mismatching of bodies and spirits. Boys are to become men—masculine,
manly men—ultimately to become husbands and fathers. No one is
predestined to a perverted use of these powers.

<span id="anchor-43"></span>Even those who have been drawn into wicked
practices and are bound by almost unyielding habits can escape. If one
of you seems trapped in that, escape. Go to your father or bishop,
please. Your parents, your bishop, the servants of the Lord, the angels
of heaven and the Lord himself will help redeem you from it.

<span id="anchor-44"></span>Young Latter-day Saint men, do not tamper
with these powers, neither with yourself alone nor with one of your own
kind. Never let anyone handle you or touch those very personal parts of
your body which are an essential link in the ongoing of creation.

<span id="anchor-45"></span>Many of the world would, I am sure, be
amused by this counsel. Let them be amused. They live by another
standard, a lower one. We live by the Lord’s standard and continue to
teach it.

<span id="anchor-46"></span>It is normal and proper for a young man to
become increasingly interested in young women, to begin to date,
eventually to pair up. We encourage that, but be careful. Keep your
relationships with young women pure and chaste. Reserve those
life-giving powers for marriage.

<span id="anchor-47"></span>Generally a young man is physically
developed for marriage long before he is emotionally or spiritually or
materially qualified for it. In due time, when all things are in
balance, you will be ready. After you have kept yourself in physical
control, after you are sufficiently mature emotionally and spiritually
and have some resources materially, that is the time for marriage.

<span id="anchor-48"></span>Then you can enter into the new and
everlasting covenant. You and your sweetheart will be sealed together
for time and for all eternity. These sacred life-giving powers will then
be released for your use. They will become a binding tie in your
marriage. Through them you will become a father.

<span id="anchor-49"></span>But for now, you prepare and follow the
instruction in the scripture: “Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the
Lord.”
([D\&C 133:5](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/133.5?lang=eng#4).)

<span id="anchor-50"></span>God bless you, our young brethren, as you
strive to be clean. In doing so, you will please the Lord and his
prophet, of whom I bear witness, in the name of [Jesus
Christ](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/jesus-christ). Amen.

That was only three talks from this sentient pile of semen infused human
waste. These are merely the talks that Boyd KKK Pack a Punch is most
known for. Keep in mind, this mutherfucker was a member of the general
authorities since 1961, and was one of the twelve apostles from 1970
until his death on July 3<sup>rd</sup>, 2015. For anybody that doesn't
understand the hiearchy of the church, that basically translates to him
having access to the pulpit to give a talk in general conference, twice
a year, for 44 fucking years. That's a lot of time he's spent spewing
racist, homophobic, misogynistic, calculated verbal diarrhea. These
talks have played no small part in shaping church stances, and altering
the everyday average Mormon's opinions on things that are at the base of
the human experience. 

It's not only Packer-it-deeper that's done this. He's been one small
part of this church that has been abusively effective at shaping the
minds of young men and women to fit into, what they consider, to be the
quintessential cookie cutter of human sexuality, and morality, and it's
so fucking wrong. It's marred believer's understanding of the
complexities of gender and sex, and it's forced, even the most fortified
minds, to repress and fear their own desires and deep internal feelings
and urges. 

This isn't some old fucker spouting antiquated ideals from a bully
pulpit that can be ignored. This is a man with a society that's
explicitly insular, that listens to every word he says, and takes it to
heart. I'm not just saying that because the shit he said seemed
outrageous. I'm saying it because I've seen the real world consequences
of this. As of right now, at age 24, I have more friends in Utah that
were married to the first person they started to seriously date after
returning home from their missions, than I have friends that experienced
all the facets of a relationship, before commiting to a marriage. I
would be willing to bet that most of the Native Utah listeners that grew
up Mormon share this same phenomenon, or better yet, are one of those
themselves. 

In case that wasn't plain enough for some, I have more friends that
never fucked or lived with the person they were married to until their
marriage night, than I have friends that actually test drove the car
before buying. I assume that some listeners may be somewhat divided on
this subject. Afterall, if you know for a fact that if you are
somebody's first, and they are your first, there really aren't any
chances of STD's being transmitted. But, after a lot of reflection, I
think the benefits of dual virgin marriage stops here. Proponents of
virgin marriage may say that sex isn't everything in marriage. Well, I
would argue that it's an integral piece that shouldn't be treated
flippantly, or have it's part in a relationship downplayed. On the
flipside, it's also a regular part of human biology that shouldn't be
raised on this high pedestal, and treated as some kind of holy communion
between partners. It's dirty and sweaty and natural, and it's nothing
like porn.

When people repress their own sexual desires for years until exactly 15
minutes after the wedding reception, they will inevitably be
dissappointed. Trust me, nobody looks back on their first time and says
that was the best sex I ever had. It's awkward, it's weird, you aren't
sure what to do, and it's impossible to keep it in for any longer than 4
thrusts because it all ends so ubruptly. It doesn't matter how much
masturbation is done prior in preparation, the first time is nothing
spectacular. In fact, it's often times a let down for one or both
parties. But with practice, and persistence, you act like less of a
misprogrammed robot during foreplay, and that 4 thrusts turns into 4
minutes, just like it should be, and you become one more participant in
the average American sex life. 

I've described the normal timeline for somebody growing up in the
church, but let me briefly rehash it to make a point. You grow up, get
baptized, go through all the offices of young men, or young women, then
hopefully go on a mission at age 18 or 19, then come home and meet the
person of your dreams, date for a couple months, then get engaged for a
month or two, then get married, and then your life is over. The years
leading up to the marriage are a very weird time for teenage and young
adult bodies that are sexually maturing, and Ass-Packer made abundantly
clear the Mormon stance on anything sexual before that wedding night.
This level of organized repression leads to childish views of human
sexuality, and really fucked up sex lives during marriage. It idealizes
sex to be something much more than it ever is, or ever will be. If you
spend your entire life wanting something, and expecting to get it once
you've been righteous enough and held off until marriage night, you
expect it to be the perfected possible version of what it actually is.
It inevitably leaves that person disappointed. Even more than that, when
men are so strictly forbidden to "fondle themselves", or release the
pressure valve of their little factories, which they'll inevitably do,
the guilt associated with it is soul crushing.

I remember the first time I started my little factory. It was a shower
situation. I remember wondering what the fuck happened, and why I felt
the way I just felt. Then it dawned on me. THIS WAS MASTURBATION\!? This
is what God hated so much? This is what my parents had been telling me
not to do for so long? This is the sin that makes it so I can't go on my
mission? The whole time, this is what my bishop, and church leaders, and
stake president, and all the talking old guys on the television told me
is something that added to Jesus' pain in the garden of Gethsemane? The
personal anguish, and torment, and overwhelming guilt for my actions,
hit me waaay harder than the rush of adrenaline and dopamine from my
first cum only seconds before. It was a burden that I carried around for
weeks, vowing to never touch myself again, even when married.

More than the guilt, was the compiled fear of shame. This is something
that's hard to explain to someone who hasn't experienced it, but the
shame for what I did, and the fear of people finding out, was a level of
anxiety that my young brain could barely deal with. I had commited a
horrible sin. This meant that I had to talk to my parents, then they
would set up a meeting with the bishop, meaning I would have to go into
his office after church one sunday, and confess my sin with all the bare
naked details. Then, I would have to go through some kind of discipline
for my actions. And when you're in your early teens, you don't
understand the gravity of the situation, you just assume the worst will
happen, and it'll be straight to the ex-communication tribunal. Since
masturbating would get me excommunicated, I wouldn't be able to receive
the Melchizedik priesthood, nor would I be able to go on my mission, nor
would I be able to get married in the temple, so I wouldn't be able to
go to the highest level of the celestial kingdom when I died, or Jesus
came back. Is that a healthy amount of fucking pressure for a 12 year
old? Does that constant anxiety shed any light on the disturbingly high
relative rate of male teen suicides/suicide attempts in Utah? Does that
bring any perspective into Utah having the highest level of consumption
of anti-depressants for teens in the entire United States? And that's
just for masturbating\! Compound it by about a fucking kajillion for
pre-marital sex\! And I had it easy\!\!\! My parents were awesome about
leaving me to myself, and not asking too tough of questions too often,
and I had the added advantage of experiencing all of this as a striaght
teenager. If all of this was too much for me to handle, I could never
possibly wrap my puny mind around what a gay teenager must go through.
Think back on Packer's vitriol for all those unnatural gays\! Most of
the ignorant, unfactual, hatefilled bullshit he said about them, are
stances held by the majority of TBM's today. Most of them consider
homosexuality as one of the ultimate crimes against god. How bad must
that fuck up the minds of gay teenagers in the church?\! No wonder Utah
has one of the highest rates of homeless gay teens in the U.S. Mormon
parents that have been repressed by the same homophobic, and sex-hating
superstructure that these gay teens have to deal with, don't know how to
handle their children when they tell them that they're gay. So the
parents tell the teenager that it's a crime against god, and not only a
decision, but a challenge that god gave them to test their strength in
the church, and they can choose to either not be gay, or move out of the
house. Any belief system that creates homeless gay teenagers, even as a
byproduct, cannot be considered a moral belief system. It's
systematically fucked up, and it needs to be abandoned, and held
accountable for all the pain and anguish it's caused for millions of
people.

Back to my original point. Boyd K. Packin' your brain full o' shit, and
his position in the Mormon church has forever left it's mark on the
collective psyche of the church's followers. Even after people leave the
church, they have moral, and sexual baggage to try and combat with logic
and understanding. I've been out of the church for half the amount of
years I was in it, and I find myself having to shrug off ignorant, and
indoctrinated perspectives of gender and sexuality all the time. I was
taught to hate gays as much as murderers. I was taught that a woman is
made worthless once her virginity has been taken. I was indoctrinated to
believe that a marriage could only be successful if I save myself for my
wedding night. I was pushed to have the goal of making my wedding day be
my first kiss. I was forced into the mindset of living in sin, being a
one way ticket to absolute exile from every friend or family member,
because I had seen it many, many times with extended family members.
Even to this day, I'm afraid to tell my parents that I lived with a girl
for a while, because I don't want to have that conversation, and I don't
want to feel their unspoken scorn for this horrible sin. To this day,
I'll ocassionally fight the completely fucked up urge to point at a gay
couple and scoff like they're some anomaly, or anthropromorphic tumor. I
never would and I'm well on my way to overcoming that deeply wrong, and
bigotted instinct, but that urge came from somewhere, because it didn't
come from me, and it's something I have to conciously fight because it's
not me. I feel wrong talking to friends and coworkers about my
relationships, because I know that sexuality is something to be shared
between loving partners and not another soul. My brain rips itself in
half when I talk to a friend that's getting married to somebody they've
been dating for less than six months. I want to tell them that they
don't know what they don't know, and they won't know what they're
getting into until it's too late. I want to scream rants of rationality
and real world consequences at them. If they would just open their mind
to the rest of the world outside of their indoctrination, they might
discover that they could be making a huge mistake moving this quickly
with somebody they barely know. I was only recently able to overcome the
deeply engrained guilt after masturbating, god forbid if it was coupled
with porn\! I feel like I have to explain myself to any partner I'm
with, just for the sake of excusing my odd mannerisms and lack of
experience with the opposite sex during the formative years of my
teenage sexuality. 

Most of all, I don't know if I'll ever overcome the guilt of letting
down my family. For not becoming the person I promised I would be, and
for doing everything that I promised I never would do. I never went on a
mission. I didn't save myself for my wedding night. I didn't go through
the temple. I didn't ever baptize somebody. I didn't ever stand in a
prayer circle. I didn't ever wear the sacred garments. I drink coffee
and alchohol. I swear, sometimes profusely, or when it's inappropriate.
I'll never regain my purity to get married in the temple. I'll never
sincerely bear my testimony again. I'll never enter a church again,
unless it's in support of a friend or family member, or to be
ex-communicated. I'll never be back on the inside at family reunions.
I'll never be able to have a genuine conversation, about something
deeper than a puddle, with any believing friend or family member,
because I'm an outsider now. And to crown it all, I'll never be able to
take back the pain I caused my parents. All the prodding questions from
fellow ward members, all the questions about their parenting skills, all
the questions they must ask themselves about where they went wrong to
have raised a sinner. None of those times can be taken back. None of the
time they spent counselling church leaders for baseless advice on
parenting can ever be recovered. But the worst part, the shining shit
covered gem in this fucked up crown of family problems, built upon a
mountain of uninformed, biggotted, ignorant, sexist, bullshit. It's the
mechanism behind it all that drives overprotective parenting, and
unbreakable indoctrination in the church. My parents deeply, and
sincerely believe that they'll spend eternity without Bryce in it. I
love my parents so much, and I know they love me. But the church has
forged this massive casm between us. I feel like I can't be genuine with
them, for fear of hurting them even more. Every conversation we have
seems more shallow than the last, and it feels like this painful divide
is only growing. I hate the church for what it's done to us. The deep
seated anger that's rooted in the darkest corners of my conscious, will
never be truly overcome. The damage the church has done to the
relationships I used to have, and cherish, is something that I can never
forgive, and refuse to forget. I say all this because I know I'm not the
only one with these feelings. I had a very typical Mormon experience,
and I got out before most that are born in the church do. There are
millions that must feel like I do. I know this vitriolic frustration
will slowly fade, and I'll get to a point that volcanic anger will no
longer be the primary driving force behind my activism. But for now, it
feels damn good to say rot in hell Boyd K. Packer, and with more
sincerity than I have ever mustered before.... Fuck the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter Day Saints.
