---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 11 - Joseph Smith’s glass looking on trial
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-11-joseph-smiths-glass-looking-trial/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep11-joseph-smiths-glass-looking-on-trial
category: History
date: 2015-02-13 03:45:44 +0000
---

Episode 11

Hello, and welcome to episode 11 of the Naked Mormonism podcast. My name
is Bryce Blankenagel and thank you for joining me.

I hope that everybody didn't mind having an episode that was a little
bit of a divergence from the usual historical analysis. One thing I
enjoy even more than learning crazy Mormon shit, is a good challenging
debate. Even better than a debate, is a back and forth conversation
wherein the socratic method is heavily applied, to challenge the
knowledge and beliefs of both individuals. That's what I get every time
I talk with Jesse, and I just figured I would record it and give it to
everybody to enjoy. I would like to get some more feedback on what
people think about the debate, if it's something that everybody likes
enough, I'll make it a little more available, and engage in
conversations with other people about a myraid of other topics, and
continue to release them as special edition episodes, apart from the
historical analysis. But, if enough people message me, and say they
didn't enjoy the conversation, and that I should just stick with
history, then that's what I'll do, and if I ever do have conversations,
I'll just post them separately on youtube or something, and won't
include them as episodes of this podcast. I may just make a separate
podcast for the debates entirely, I'll just have to see how they're
received after a few of them. 

You guys may not have liked the extra long break between historical
episodes, but I will admit, it was nice to have some extra time to do
some deeper research about the BoM, as we edge ever nearer to the
analysis of it. But we can't get into Joe's pride and joy just yet,
because we need to talk more about Joseph Smith himself. He had the
plates, and was getting ansty to translate them into what we now have as
the BoM. There were social and family pressures constantly building into
a heavier and more massive burden for Joe to shoulder, and he had to
find the proper valve to turn, to release all of the building pressures.

Unfortunately, releasing the BoM was the wrong valve to turn, but Joe
couldn't know that until he actually went to all the trouble of
authoring, and printing it. So we'll have to analyze the BoM, in it's
entirety, when it fits into the storyline. As for today's episode, we're
going to jump backwards in the timeline just a little bit, to talk about
Joe's court appearances. We'll specifically focus on the 1826 hearing
that is so well known to have besmirched Joe's reputation. The hearing
wherein he was called a glass looker, and was sued for being disorderly
and an imposter.

There are so many moving parts to this hearing, and the evidence is
unfortunately scarce at best. I'll start off this episode by reading the
entire court document, then I'll talk about how we know about it, and
where the evidence came from.

Let's start with setting the scene, and who filed the charges. Josiah
Stowell, who we refer to as Bossman Joe, employed Joseph Smith in mid to
late 1825, to do some treasure hunting, and occassionally do stuff
around the farm to actually earn his keep. This was in Harmony
Pennsylvania, basically right across the street from the Hale family
ranch. 

Can't you just picture the scene, Emma playing the part of beautiful and
mysterious girl next door. Emma's outside hanging up the laundry, Joe's
across the street with his shirt sleeves rolled up and showing off his
strength, while he arduously digs a hole looking for buried treasure, in
her neighbors front yard. How romantic right? 

So Joe gets distracted from his work, and apparently his record of 0
treasure finds so far, under the employ of Bossman Joe, takes a turn for
the worse. Bossman Joe believed everything Joe said, and considered Joe
to be a friend, and seer coach. Unfortunately for Joe, Bossman Joe's
family wasn't quite as approving, or credulous of Joe's activities,
specifically fabricating unknowable information from his rock and hat,
and considered Bossman Joe Stowell to be one more victim to this
charlatans talonlike grip.

We have differing accounts of who filed the lawsuit, that come from
different sources. We'll discuss why after reading the court document.
For now I'll just say that the history of these court documents is a
little polarizing and pretty challenging to nurse the real history out.
A lot of these have been known about for a long time by church
authorities, and were possibly covered up. The documents were sought for
long after their creation, and are partially damaged. We'll try to
uncover everything that happened surrounding the discoveries of these
documents, and how heated the controversy is.

But for now, let's just jump right into the court notes.

<span id="anchor"></span>****State of New York v. Joseph Smith.****

    Warrant issued upon written complaint upon oath of Peter G.
Bridgeman, who informed that one Joseph Smith of Bainbridge was a
disorderly person and an impostor.

This Peter G. Bridgeman was Bossman Joe's nephew. In fact, most of the
records indicate that it was primarily members of Bossman Joe's family
that filed the suit against Joe. We'll find out why as we get further
into the witness testimonies.

    Prisoner brought before Court March 20, 1826. Prisoner examined:
says that he came from the town of Palmyra, and had been at the house of
Josiah Stowel in Bainbridge most of time since (probably since summer of
1825); had small part of time been employed in looking for mines
(meaning treasure seeking), but the major part had been employed by said
Stowel on his farm, and going to school. That he had a certain stone
which he had occasionally looked at to determine where hidden treasures
in the bowels of the earth were; that he professed to tell in this
manner where gold mines were a distance under ground, and had looked for
Mr. Stowel several times, and had informed him where he could find these
treasures, and Mr. Stowel had been engaged in digging for them. That at
Palmyra he pretended to tell by looking at this stone where coined money
was buried in Pennsylvania, and while at Palmyra had frequently
ascertained in that way where lost property was of various kinds; that
he had occasionally been in the habit of looking through this stone to
find lost property for three years, but of late had pretty much given it
up on account of its injuring his health, especially his eyes, making
them sore; that he did not solicit business of this kind, and had always
rather declined having anything to do with this business.

That was Joe's statement, and therefore perspective of the situation. He
doesn't posit any fantastic claims, doesn't offer an explanation for his
actions, just basically states the facts timeline from how he remembers
it. In this court hearing, like most, we get the charges, the defendant
makes his/her statement, in this case Joe's explanation of events. Then
we get the defendants witness' statment, followed by the prosecution
witness' statements. During the prosecution statements, I'll examine the
claims Joe makes about the situation in his statement, and reference
them to try and tease out the real Naked history.

The only witness that explicitly came to Joe's defense, was Bossman
Josiah Stowell. There was one other testimony that was favorable towards
Joe, but it doesn't seem like much of a defense witness testimony, and
I'll explain why later. For now, let's hear how Bossman Joe remembered
what happened.

Josiah Stowel sworn: says that prisoner had been at his house something
like five months; had been employed by him to work on farm part of time;
that he pretended to have skill of telling where hidden treasures in the
earth were by means of looking through a certain stone; 

Here Bossman Joe, as defendant for the prophet, explicitly says that Joe
pretended to have a skill of telling where hidden treasures were. The
one defending witness statement that Joe had, the only person that came
to Joe's legal rescue, just told us everything we need to know about
Joe, before he even gets to the meat of his testimony. But let's
continue to find some more gems. 

that prisoner had looked for him sometimes; once to tell him about money
buried in Bend Mountain in Pennsylvania, once for gold on Monument Hill,
and once for a salt spring; and that he positively knew that the
prisoner could tell, and did 'possess the art of seeing those valuable
treasures through the medium of said stone; 

Unfortunately, we often see the elderly preyed upon when a private
contractor is hired to do some work for them. Well, Joe had a way of
swaying his elders to believe him, when so many people around the person
that was Joe's target, that were younger, could see right through Joe's
swindling facade. So far we only know this because the person that filed
the lawsuit was Bossman Joe's nephew, who was looking out for the
financial well-being of his uncle. Peter Bridgeman could see the writing
on the wall and knew that his uncle was credulous enough to believe what
Joe said. Peter was probably going to all the trouble to wake up Bossman
Joe before he drank Joe's cool-aid, and sold his soul to the whims of
the genius madman in training.

\[that omitted for continuity\] he found the \[word illegible\] at Bend
and Monument Hill as prisoner represented it;

I'm not sure, but I believe this line is referring to where Joe found
the stone that him and his older brother Hyrum stole from Willard Chase.
I couldn't affirm this suspicion, but it seems to follow as a logical
conclusion, because they probably would have asked Joe to show them the
rock he had been using for his stoned sight. And the question that would
immediately follow would be, "Where did you get that stone from".

that prisoner had looked through said stone for Deacon Attleton for a
mine, did not exactly find it, but got a p— \[word unfinished\] of ore
which resembled gold, he thinks; 

The unfinished word is probably "a 'piece' of ore which resembled gold".
I recommend doing a google search for iron pyrite. For those who can't
or don't care to, if you were to see this stuff, it looks just like what
a lay person would expect gold ore to look like. Gold ore is usually
very small and panned for in mineral rich areas, or small chunks of
lumpy raw ore can be found while mining it, and other ore veins. Iron
pyrite frequently sits on top of gravel beds, or is buried very shallow
in the ground, in areas that are rich in iron sulfide and cobalt or
nickel. Well, when it oxidizes, it changes from grey to an iridiscent
yellow, and is commonly called fools gold for its remarkable similarity
to gold, to the untrained eye. I would be willing to propose that Joe
probably found a piece of fools gold and told Bossman Joe that he found
a piece of real gold while using stoned sight with his favorite little
stone. You know what. I just decided on something. Joe uses this stolen
stone as his favorite for a long time. He uses other ones later on as he
becomes the cult leader known as the prophet Joseph Smith. But, from now
on, on this show, whenever Joe is going to used stoned sight in his hat,
he'll be pulling 'precious' out of his pocket, and putting it in Mr.
Hat. Those are the newest nicknames to be added to the NaMo roster. 

that prisoner had told by means of this stone where a Mr. Bacon had
buried money; that he and prisoner had been in search of it; that
prisoner had said it was in a certain root of a stump five feet from
surface of the earth, and with it would be found a tail feather; that
said Stowel and prisoner thereupon commenced digging, found a tail
feather, but money was gone; that he supposed the money moved down. 

That was Bossman Josiah Stowell, saying in his witness testimony, on
behalf of Joe, that Joe had duped him into digging for a treasure, and
had convinced him beyond a shadow of a doubt, that the fuckin ground
gnomes were fuckin with their treasure hunting again. It's probable to
assume that Joe had planted the feather in the woods where he led
Bossman Joe to, using precious and Mr. Hat. Joe probably even buried it
a few feet down, and memorized exactly where it was buried, and returned
with Bossman Joe during the night to dig up the same spot, only to find
one article of what Joe supposedly saw, the planted feather, with no
accompanying treasure to be found.

That prisoner did offer his services; that he never deceived him; that
prisoner looked through stone and described Josiah Stowel's house and
outhouses, while at Palmyra at Simpson Stowel's, correctly;

This is the first parlor trick joe pulled on Bossman Joe, with precious
and Mr. Hat. When Bossman Josiah Stowell was visiting his brother
Simpson Stowell's home in Palmyra in 1825, he met Joe for the first
time. Somehow the conversation moved to Joe and his amazing ability to
see anything he wanted with his rock in his hat. Bossman Joe probably
challenged Joe's ability by asking Joe to tell him something that only a
true Glass Looker could know, or see. Simply because Joe was such a
charismatic stealth mindfucker, he was able to cold read a description
of Bossman Joe's farm and outhouse, while some 130 miles away, thus
venerating his supernatural abilities for Bossman Joe. This is just the
first of many hooks that Joe cast into the flesh of Josiah Stowell, to
slowly draw him closer, only to cast larger and more effective hooks
until Bossman Joe had lost everything, given up everything, and had sold
his soul to the Mormonite movement. Let's hear about the next convincing
little trick that Joe pulled.

\[*that* removed for continuity\] he had told about a painted tree, with
a man's head painted upon it, by means of said stone. 

Apparently Joe somehow told Bossman Joe that there was a face painted on
a tree in a forest, or maybe in the bark of a tree, it's not really
clear from this description, and it's the only record we have of this
trick leading to a treat. A naturalistic explanation would say that if
there was a face painted on a tree in the woods, and Joe told somebody
about it, and knew exactly where it was, maybe Joe just painted it
himself beforehand. Most magicians or con-men put a fair amount of
preparation into their tricks to make them more elaborate and believed
as inexplicable, and Joe was no different. Even if Joe said that there
was a face in the bark of a tree in the woods, Bossman Joe was bound to
walk past a tree that has bark that looks like a face. I see them in
quakie trees all the time when I'm camping. It's just a play on
confirmation bias, and Joe was a master at the art of this. There is one
more line to Josiah Stowell's testimony, and it is the most mind blowing
of all.

That he had been in company with prisoner digging for gold, and had the
most implicit faith in prisoner's skill.

Is that abso-fucking-lutely amaze-balls to anybody else but me? Bossman
Joe starts off his testimony telling us about Joe's failed attempts to
find treasure using a rock in a hat. Then moves on to tell us about Joe
finding some gold ore that probably was just fools gold. After that, he
tells us that Joe never decieved him, and he believed Joe because he did
some cool tricks that Bossman Joe couldn't explain, and he concludes by
saying that I was in his company of gold diggers, and I have no doubt in
his abilities as a glass looker. Can we get an applause for Joe? What
string or combination of words could Joe possibly have used to convince
Bossman Joe that he was for real? I can scarcely believe that this was
the best and only person that could witness on behalf of Joe, but there
wasn't anybody else that was involved in the situation that didn't hate
Joe, that could come to Joe's rescue. The burden fell on Bossman Joe,
whose family it was that filed the lawsuit in the first place, to try
and recooperate some of Bossman Joe's money. We have record of two other
possible witness that came to Joe's defense, and that was Jonathan
Thompson, which is included later in this account, and Big Daddy Cheese
Joseph Smith Sr. But his testimony is only recorded in one of the
accounts of court records, as opposed to all 3 we have record of, and it
was recorded long after the trial happened. I'll get a little deeper
into that later on, and I'll read as much of it as possible as well.

But for now, let's hear the prosecution witnesses statements, and see
what they have to offer.

    Arad Stowel sworn: says that he went to see whether prisoner could
convince him that he possessed the skill he professed to have, upon
which prisoner laid a book upon a white cloth, and proposed looking
through another stone which was white and transparent, hold the stone to
the candle, turn his head to book, and read. The deception appeared so
palpable that witness went off disgusted.

Here we have Arad trying to imperically test the 20 year old prophet's
real abilities. You see, when you watch a magic show, or even a movie,
you are watching an orchstrated scene, that is designed to deceive, or
convey a message that is manufactured. Houdini was a master at set and
setting. He created these elaborate scenes where death or mortal injury
was truly inevitable. Then, he did something behind the scenes,
something that only he knew about, and jumped out of a whiskey barrel
behind the crowd or something. Well, the problem with having to
construct these elaborate scenes to convince people of your
authenticity, is the inability to cope with a challenge on the fly. Much
like the periodontitis from a ruptured appendix, was an unexpected
outcome of a planned situation for Ehrich Weisz known as Harry Houdini,
that eventually led to his fall from glory due to his death, somebody
challenging Joseph on the fly, always resulted in disaster for Joe and
his character.

I love the next witness testimony. Not only does it affirm the last one
we heard, which counts as concurring 1<sup>st</sup> hand accounts of the
same situation, but it also introduces a new claim that further speaks
to the character of Joseph Smith, and isn't outside the scope of
possibility as far as the claim itself goes, probably because it
concurrs with Joe's testimony too.

    McMaster sworn: says he went with Arad Stowel, and likewise came
away disgusted. Prisoner pretended to him that he could discover objects
at a distance by holding this white stone to the sun or candle; that
prisoner rather declined looking into a hat at his dark coloured stone,
as he said that it hurt his eyes.

Like I said, concurring witness testimonies that are firsthand accounts
and sworn to authenticity on judicial record, and all of it is recorded
from original copies that we still have access to. This is historical
gold, and it wasn't mined easily, but we'll get into that later. Let's
get to the last one, because it's definitely my favorite.

    Jonathan Thompson says that prisoner was requested to look for chest
of money; did look, and pretended to know there it was; and that
prisoner, Thompson, and Yeomans went in search of it; 

Joe convinced Jonathon Thompson to go digging for a chest of money that
he apparently knew about, or could see through precious and Mr. Hat. And
Jonathan even says explicitly that Joe 'pretended' to know where to look
for it.

that Smith arrived at spot first; was at night; that Smith looked in hat
while there, and when very dark, told how the chest was situated. After
digging several feet, struck upon something sounding like a board or
plank. Prisoner would not look again, pretending that he was alarmed on
account of the circumstances relating to the trunk being buried,
\[which\] came all fresh to his mind.

I hope everybody's ready for this ride. Joe's about to turn the bullshit
up to 11.

That the last time he looked he discovered distinctly the two Indians
who buried the trunk, that a quarrel ensued between them, and that one
of said Indians was killed by the other, and thrown into the hole beside
the trunk, to guard it, as he supposed. 

Jonathon Thompson and Joe were out treasure digging during the night,
and while they were digging in the place Joe designated, they apparently
struck a board with their shovels, and stopped digging for a second to
assess the situation. Joe refused to look in \[HAT NAME HERE\] again to
see what was in the chest they supposedly just struck. Of course, Joe
was too afraid to do so, because he supposedly saw the two Native
Americans that had buried the chest there in the first place. Apparently
they got in an argument about the contents of the chest, and one of the
Indians was struck dead and fell in the hole with the treasure, only to
spend eternity as it's spirit guardian from pesky little treasure
hunters like Joe and friends. 

I simply can't wrap my brain around the perspective and world view these
people must have had. I suppose that it's a world view filled with
confirmation bias, and elaborate ritual behavior, but I just can't
understand it from a current modern perspective. These people really
believed in spirits that would sink the treasure they were digging for,
further into the ground while they were digging for it. Look, if you are
digging into the ground for something that might, or might not be there,
wherever it is in the ground, it's going to stay there the entire time
you are digging for it. That's because the crust of the earth isn't made
out of fucking pudding. It's rock and dirt\! Inanimate shit doesn't just
move through the Earth's crust on it's own volition. That's not how
things work\! Whatever is underground, is going to be there, and stay
there, whether somebody is digging for it or not. I say this because
it's a disconnect in world views, and scientific knowledge. We have an
account of Joe saying that all the rolling hills you see in Palmyra were
actually constructed by the spanish forerunners, or Indian spirits, in
order to conceal all the treasure they had looted throughout the ages.
It doesn't have anything to do with scientific geological feature
formation, it's all about how the ancient inhabitants wanted to fuck
with the people that lived after them. It's so fucking crazy, and do you
want to hear the bat-shittiest part of it, Jonathan's next line in his
testimony.

Thompson says that he believes in the prisoner's professed skill; that
the board which he struck his spade upon was probably the chest, but on
account of an enchantment the trunk kept settling away from under them
when digging, that notwithstanding they continued constantly removing
the dirt, yet the trunk kept about the same distance from them.

So when I said earlier that there was only one witness on behalf of Joe,
I was not mistaken, I was designating them as such based on the evidence
given by each account, and whether or not it was actually beneficial to
Joe's case or not. Technically, Jonathon Thompson was a witness on the
stand, on behalf of Joe and the defending side, but I honestly feel like
it reveals more damning evidence against Joe, than it actually helps his
case, which is what a witness on Joe's side of the court should have
done. So the witness testimonies were balanced in this account of the
trial, 2 for and 2 against, but when you take a step back and look at
it, the evidence that's put forth is almost exclusively condemning of
Joe's lifestyle choices, with the exception of 2 lines from 2 different
people saying that they believed Joe no matter what he said. 

Says prisoner said that it appeared to him that salt might be found at
Bainbridge, and that he is certain that prisoner can divine things by
means of said stone. That as evidence of the fact prisoner looked into
his hat to tell him about some money witness lost sixteen years ago, and
that he described the man that witness supposed had taken it, and the
disposition of the money:

That concludes the testimonies in the Justice Neeley record of the
court. There is a lot to talk about when we take a step back and examine
them as a whole, but before doing that, we have to finish the last and
most important part of the record, which is rife with current day
controversy and debate.

    And therefore the Court find the Defendant guilty. Costs: Warrant,
19c. Complaint upon oath, 25 1/2c. Seven witnesses, 87 1/2c.
Recognisances, 25c. Mittimus, 19c. Recognisances of witnesses, 75c.
Subpoena, 18c. - $2.68.

So what does that last part mean? It clearly just convicted the
defendant, Joseph Smith, as guilty of being an imposter and a disorderly
man, but what exactly does that entail. By today's standards, disorderly
conduct is basically a breach of the peace, or somebody who is speaking
rudely to another to the point of it being a problem for the community.
But in Joe's day and time, a disorderly person was anybody who practiced
glass looking, crystal gazing, palmistry, pretending to tell fortunes,
or pretending to discover where lost goods may be found. Well, based off
the testimonies provided to the court, Joe was on the recieving end of a
guilty verdict for just those reasons, and I would argue, rightfully so.

Now that we've read the court document, what can we surmise from the
information, and what can be concluded based off the ruling of judge
Neeley?

Let's hear what Fairmormon.org has to say about the ruling. For anybody
unfamiliar with the site, it's a mormon apologist website that tries to
justify Joseph Smith as a legitimate prophet, who is responsible for
starting the best and most accurate religion on the planet.

This was written by Mormon apologist Russell Anderson in 2002 regarding
the trial and verdict.

What we can obtain from the conclusions are first of all that it wasn’t
a trial, it was an examination. It was likely initiated not so much from
a concern about him being a money digger, as it was that Joseph was
having an influence on Josiah Stowell. Josiah Stowell was one of the
first believers in Joseph Smith. His nephew was probably very concerned
about that and was anxious to disrupt that relationship if possible. It
is likely that there were seven witnesses. It is also probable there was
some editing of the witnesses’ testimonies. All witnesses however,
testified that Joseph did possess a gift, though there is some variation
about how strong that gift was. The key issue is that we can accept
Joseph Smith. When we put him in this early 19th century culture, he is
consistent with that environment. We can accept that what he did was
part of that culture, his age and experience, and it doesn’t have any
impact or discredit that fact that he was a prophet of God. 

Does a court ruling discredit Joe? Not necessarily, because real truth
isn't determined in a court of law. Especially when it comes to a case
based solely on witness testimony, we aren't capable of saying that Joe
was a fraud on the standing of the verdict alone. But I'll be completely
honest, the facts surrounding this case have a bit of controversy
attached, as can be understood when it comes to a trial convicting a
prophet of god, to be nothing more that a con-man. But, the trial wasn't
a real trial. Based on the order that the testimonies were given in, it
more equated to a pre-trial, to determine if guilt could be established
for a formal case, than an actual court case. That's why our prophet
defendant was the first to give his testimony, and the witnesses
followed after, as opposed to the prosecution making a case, and the
defendant reporting an alibi, or some kind of evidence to remove the
burden of guilt.

All of this being said and taken into consideration, I did also say that
we don't determine truth in a court of law. We try to get as close to
the truth as possible, and that's why we have multiple witness
statements to compare against each other to tease out the truth. So, for
the sake of historical analysis, if we simply ignore the verdict passed
down by Judge Neeley, what can be deduced about Joseph Smith as a
person, from the testimonies themselves? 

Let me put it this way. When a group of children are playing on the
playground, one bully child is inevitably going to hit or push the
smallest, or weirdest child on the playground. So put yourself in the
position of the counsellor that has to talk to the children after
recess, to try and ascertain the truth. You don't listen to the bullies
side of the story, then immediately take action against the little kid
that was the victim of the violence. Likewise, you don't listen to what
the kid with the black eye says, and immediately punish the bully
accordingly. You have to hear both sides of the disagreement, then ask
other children that were nearby when the incident happened, to see how
they remember shit going down. Then you look for the recurring themes in
each testimony, and take into account the character of both children
that were involved, and eventually you can get pretty close to the
truth, without being there to see it for yourself. One kid will say the
little kid called the bully a dumb butthead, and another kid will say
the big kid walked up to the little kid and hit him without provocation.
Whatever you hear most frequently as a recurring theme from the people
that actually saw it, is probably closest to what actually happened. 

Well we can treat Joe and this court case with the same method of
historical information extraction. We have 5 accredited witness
testimonies, all saying that Joe pretended to have an ability that he
didn't have. In fact the word "pretend/pretended" occurs 6 times
throughout the entire document, meaning we can consider it a recurring
theme.

When we examine what Joe claims about his treasure seeking and stone
peeping, and reference it against all the other testimonies, we see that
Joe used the stone in the hat trick either occassionally (as he
reported), or frequently (as everybody else reported). He had been
repeatedly unsuccessful by everybody's account, and had quit the
business because it apparently hurt his eyes too much to stare into his
hat with a rock in it.

The court document states 7 witnesses, but I only read 5 testimonies
including Joe's. So what the fuck gives? Well, this is where the
controversy starts to get heated, as we try to explain who the other 3
witnesses are. Before I get to those witnesses and their testimony, let
me shed a little light on how we know about this trial, and where the
court records came from. 

This entire reconstruction of the trial with the defendant and 4
witnesses, was taken from a document that was obtained by a woman named
Emily Pearsall, who was the Niece of Judge Neeley. She tore the pages
from her uncle's docket book. One may ask why a person would do such a
thing and tarnish these valuable documents into a form that wasn't their
original? Well, because Emily was on a mission to proscelyte to the Utah
Mormonites, under the authority of Episcopalian bishop Daniel S. Tuttle.
Luckily the documents made it back to the hands of Judge Neeley, who was
in possession of them when Emily died. That leads us to an unfortunate
conclusion. We don't have the original document that we can examine and
compare, to relinquish us of fraudulent copies, of which there are
plenty. But, using a few historical tricks, we know these 5 testimonies
to be accurate. 

Luckily for us again, there were some other people in the courtroom that
were taking notes, in addition to Justice Neeley, who was responsible
for the most accurate and comprehensive account.

I'm going to read the other two testimonies that we have, and talk about
how we got them, and why they aren't included in Neeley's account
afterward. They are written from an active observers perspective, so we
don't get to parse through raw court data, but the basic message still
gets across. This is from William D. Purple.  

Joseph Smith, Sr.(That's right, Big Daddy Cheese was there to defend his
son's actions), was present, and sworn as a witness. He confirmed, at
great length all that his son had said in his examination. He delineated
his characteristics in his youthful days--his vision of the luminous
stone in the glass--his visit to Lake Erie in search of the stone--and
his wonderful triumphs as a seer. He described very many instances of
his finding hidden and stolen goods. He swore that both he and his son
were mortified that this wonderful power which God had so miraculously
given him should be used only in search of filthy lucre, or its
equivalent in earthly treasures, and with a long-faced, "sanctimonious
seeming," he said his constant prayer to his Heavenly Father was to
manifest His will concerning this marvelous power. He trusted that the
Son of Righteousness would some day illumine the heart of the boy, and
enable him to see His will concerning him. These words have ever had a
strong impression on my mind. They seemed to contain a prophetic vision
of the future history of that mighty delusion of the present century,
Mormonism. The "old man eloquent," with his lank and haggard
vissage--his form very poorly clad--indicating a wandering vagabond
rather than an oracle of future events, has, in view of those events,
excited my wonder, if not my admiration. 

I'll address the claims in a second, but I have to get out the other
testimony because it's short and almost useless. 

Horace Stowel sworn. Says he see (sic) prisoner look into hat through
stone, pretending to tell where a chest of dollars were buried in
Windsor, a number of miles distant; marked out size of chest in leaves
on ground." 

Horace Stowell was just another person that was a witness against Joe,
and basically told us more of the same that we already knew. But Big
Daddy Cheese, tells us some useful and intersting shit. There's even
some shit we've never heard before, concerning Joe's young life as a
glass looker. Well, that's because William D. Purple's account of Joe's
testimony, differs from that of Judge Neeley's account. This forces me
to read Joe's first account again, but this time it's actively observed
and recorded by Purple, with a little bit of bias.

Mr. Smith was fully examined by the Court. It elicited little but a
history of his life from early boyhood, but this is so unique in
character, and so much of a key-note to his subsequent career in the
world, I am tempted to give it somewhat in entenso. He said when he was
a lad, he heard of a neighboring girl some three miles from him, who
could look into a glass and see anything however hidden from others;
that he was seized with a strong desire to see her and her glass; that
after much effort he induced his parents to let him visit her. He did
so, and was permitted to look in the glass, which was placed in a hat to
exclude the light. He was greatly surprised to see but one thing, which
was a small stone, a great way off. It soon became luminous, and dazzled
his eyes, and after a short time it became as intense as the mid-day
sun. He said that the stone was under the roots of a tree or shrub as
large as his arm, situated about a mile up a small stream that puts in
on the South side of Lake Erie, not far from the Now York and
Pennsylvania line. He often had an opportunity to look in the glass, and
with the same result. The luminous stone alone attracted his attention.
This singular circumstance occupied his mind for some years, when he
left his father's house, and with his youthful zeal traveled west in
search of this luminous stone.

He took a few shillings in money and some provisions with him. He
stopped on the road with a farmer, and worked three days, and
replenished his means of support. After traveling some one hundred and
fifty miles he found himself at the mouth of the creek. He did not have
the glass with him, but he knew its exact location. He borrowed an old
ax and a hoe, and repaired to the tree. With some labor and exertion he
found the stone, carried it to the creek, washed and wiped it dry, sat
down on the bank, placed it in his hat, and discovered that time, place
and distance were annihilated; that all intervening obstacles were
removed, and that he possessed one of the attributes of Deity, an
All-Seeing-Eye. He arose with a thankful heart, carried his tools to
their owner, turned his feet towards the rising sun, and sought with
weary limbs his long deserted home.

On the request of the Court, he exhibited the stone. It was about the
size of a small hen's egg, in the shape of a high-instepped shoe. It was
composed of layers of different colors passing diagonally through it. It
was very hard and smooth, perhaps by being carried in the pocket."

That concludes Purple's account of Joe testimony, and I seriously don't
even know where to go with all the goodies in there. So apparently Joe
wasn't born a true glass looker, he had to get schooled in some scrying
expertise from somebody else, before he could reach his full potential.
If I had to make a guess, I would bet this was Sally Chase, sister of
Willard and Mason Chase who have all made quite a few appearances in the
last couple of episodes. Sally was truly renowned by her fellow treasure
diggers as a venerated glass looker, and she may have been the glass
looker that was responsible for helping the mob find the empty box that
had once contained the plates, stored under the floorboards of the
Smith's Cooper shop. Well, now we know that Joe drew first blood on that
feud, because Joe thought he might be able to one-up her, if only he
could see her technique, and get ahold of a stone that was better than
hers. So he did just that. He peeped in her stone, and the only thing he
could see was his destiny stone, precious, buried peacefully under some
roots, and it's luminosity was beyond that of the noon-day sun. The
stone apparently called to Joseph for years, and eventually was bright
enough to seek out, and Joe did just that. Maybe. We don't really know,
because there is strong evidence that the entire story was fabricated to
hide the fact, that Joe had esentially stolen the rock from Willard
Chase while they were digging a well on the Chase property. Joe didn't
want rock theft to be one more incriminating strike against his
character during the trial.

Well, what we have here, is another peek into the mind of the ever
dynamic and constantly adapting mind of Joseph Smith. I have said
countless times that Joe was a charismatic mutherfucker, and I don't
mean that lightly. He was a smooth talker and a devious pathological
liar, and there is no way around the facts about him.

When we harvest the nuggets of truth from this conundrum of historical
hodge podge, we can see that Joe was an amazing and fascinating
individual. TBM's often lose sight of the gravity of their founding
father. He's revered as a holy prophet of god, and is basically seen as
inehrent, nearing the level of Jesus. But that's such a cheap view, and
sells the prophet short of his actual deeds. On the other hand, during
historical analysis, often times Joe is counted as just another
charlatan, who was looking to cash in on some human credulity, and did
so successfully. The problem with both of these perspectives, is the
fact that they completely ignore the human element, and portray a
cardboard portrait of one of the most fascinating individuals in recent
religious history. If we try to take in the complete picture of Joseph
Smith, we can't be satisfied with the pixelated, incomplete, and
one-sided portrait that is so often the only perspective we get of him.
I want to know Joe the way his family members knew him. I want to know
what he thought about, and what motivated his actions. It's truly a
painful thing that we have to look at this genius anthropological
anomoly, through historical eyes, because I really wish I could meet
this guy walking down the street one day, or even have a simple
conversation with him, to try and figure out the human that turns the
gears behind the scenes of the mighty prophet Joseph Smith.
Unfortunately, I have to limit myself to the facts, and daydreaming
about such a circumstance, but at least we can get close to Joe through
the eyes of his friends and family.

When we examine the evidence around Joe, and what people said about him,
and then take into account what people that supported him said, compared
to what his dissenters claimed, we can start to see the psycholgical
profile of prophet, seer, and revelator Joseph Smith, begin to unfold.

There's a lot that I didn't cover in this episode when it comes to the
evidence and controversy of the trial. There are so many tangents to go
on, and so many rabbit holes to chase, that it simply cannot be done in
one episode. But the good news is, that's all the information we need to
know about Joe from the 1826 trial itself, and I'll have to cover the
controversy about the evidence in a later episode. I really hope you
guys will push the show to the first patreon milestone soon, so I can
make longer episodes, because apparently 14 pages of script, honestly
doesn't contain enough information about this crazy shit. There's so
much that I had to skip over surrounding this legal debaucle, but the
show must go on. I just simply need to make longer episodes to include
it all, but the listeners have to show me that you want to hear it, and
that you think the show is worth while enough, for me to put the extra
time into. As far as next episode goes, we will be evaluating Joe's
actions, in the wake of the guilty verdict, and how his reputation
suffered, becoming the catalyst for Joe to devise his ultimate plan. Get
the gold plates, and get the fuck out of NY before the mob swallowed him
up and made him disappear forever.

You may or may not have noticed that I jumped right into the historical
analysis as soon as this episode started, without including patreon
shout outs, or the fictional translation stories. Well, I have been
thinking about it, and I realized that not everybody is going to give a
shit about translation stories, or listener mail, and will shut off the
podcast as soon as the historical analysis is done. So, instead of
including my 2 minute commercial for patreon at the beginning of each
episode, I'm moving it to the end, but I still encourage everybody to
listen, as I put almost as much creative energy into the translation
stories, as I do the episodes. Well, that isn't anywhere near true, but
I still enjoy making them, and I hope it will encourage more people to
be patrons. So I can make longer and better episodes. 

Speaking of, I do have a few new patrons to add to the NaMo kingdom
ranks. 

First off is our first new NaMo Juvenile Delinquint, Andrew K. Thank you
Andrew for your patronage, I greatly appreciate it. Your arduous path
through NaMo depravity has officially commenced and I wish you luck.

Next, is our new Adolescent Rebels. Darren B., Lee P., and Lise D. Thank
you all so much for supporting the show. Your willingness to give your
hard earned money has earned you a nice warm spot in the heart of the
podcast, and I'm forever grateful for the consistent acts of altruism.

Next, is our newest Apostate, Jay M. Being an Adolescent Rebel has it's
benefits, but Jay has decided he doesn't want any part of that childs
play stuff, he's a full on apostate and will forever be known across the
land, as a great giver to the needy, and a great opposer to misreported
history, and agenda based education. Thank you for what you're doing for
the show Jay, I can't possibly express how grateful I am for you're
recurring support.

This is all fun and happy in the earthly realm, but the portal to NaMo
Outer darkness has been opened for a second time. George Greene has been
a NaMo apostate for quite some time, but his journey has now led him to
a moment of truth. Josh Crane hasn't been in the game long, but is
capable of evaluating arguments quickly and changing his world view
based on new evidence. George, as one of the most educated, and
respected world class archeaologists, recently teamed up with Josh, an
up and coming archeaology intern that graduated at the top of his class,
to form the worlds premier archeaologist and ancient treasure hunter
team. George wasn't ignorant to the dangers that exploring ancient ruins
inherently brings, but Josh had a lot to learn. George and Josh were on
one of their usual exploration missions in an underground temple with a
small but highly qualified team. While George is usually very focused on
his work, and rarely makes a false move, this day was a little bit
different, but he didn't know why. Josh could see it on George's face,
it seemed almost as if deep philosophical questions of morality, and
existence, and even life itself were burdening his consience since they
started exploring, for no explicable reason. George spontaneously began
a conversation about life and death and nature vs., eternity with Josh,
spreading his cancerous thoughts to this young intern, and creating an
overwhelming distraction for both men. But, these ancient ruins, full of
weak and aged hazards, and rife with danger, and elaborate
life-threatening traps, set by the forerunners of the ancient structure,
aren't forgiving to distractions. George was the point man on the
exploratory crew having more wisdom and knowledge than everybody else on
the team combined, with Josh walking right behind him, while carrying on
this conversation. But unfortunately, George was off his game on this
fateful translation day. Just as the exploration team entered a new
room, George and Josh, lost in much deeper thoughts, haphazardly stepped
on a shifting tile, that set off a deadly stream of events. As soon as
George realized what his hasty move precipitated, and the danger he'd
put Josh and the team in, he knew he needed to act quickly, or dire
consequences would befall the entire team of noble scientists and
archeaologists. Among bone-chilling noises of shifting tile and rock,
all concealed by complete darkness, George ordered everybody to retreat
back into the corridor that they arrived from, and hoped that their
moment of distracted carelessness didn't cost everybody their lives. The
entire team is running through blackness with only the light of
flashlights, and previously dropped glowsticks, to illuminate their
escape path. There's a disturbing, and approaching noise, that's getting
louder and louder, in the darkness behind the fleeing group of
frightened intellectuals. It was at this moment, that George realized
his order to retreat had doomed everybody, as soon as the words left his
mouth. The noise grew to a deafening level, and a quick glance over
their shoulders, tell George and Josh, now running shoulder to shoulder,
that they are fleeing from an unstoppable force; gravity and an expertly
crafted massive rock sphere, wall to wall in the corridor, rolling at a
deadly pace behind the helpless team. It all comes down to this final
moment, married to the crux of a true sense of humanity. George and Josh
both know what needs to be done. Sacrifice themselves, and save the
entire team from inevitable destruction. They both enter a sense of
higher understanding, and the world momentarily slows to a near dead
stop. They have come to understand everything now, with inevitable death
for them and their family of explorers bearing down on their collective
psyche, the true realization of presence and mortality occurs in the
minds of these soon to be heroic individuals. There is no meaning beyond
life itself. In fact, the most important thing about life, is the fact
that we are beings smart enough to contemplate, and appreciate our own
existence. The simple fact that we can play and be happy and love or
hate and despise our fellow humans, is all that life is, and that's
what's so great about it. We don't need a overwatching eye, or eternal
ultimatums as consequences for our worldly actions, we just need to be
fucking decent and honest people to one another. And above all, we need
to watch out for, and help each other every opportunity we get.
Everything was moving so slowly from their perspective, that they could
take in everything that was happening. As both men heroically turned to
face their death in an effort to slow stone and save the team, there
appeared a very small, glistening light from behind the stone. Demon
Julie had come to soul reap her NaMo kingdom recruits. George and Josh
were facing the rolling stone with full intent to sacrifice themselves,
fighting a fundamental force of nature, but Julie won't have it end so
catastrophically. With the glowing talisman in her hand, she determines
George and Josh to be worthy enough to enter the NaMo realm, and become
the second and third NaMo Demons currently ruling the outer darkness
realm. A microsecond of calculation and foresight indicates the exact
place on the massive stone marble, to place the translation talisman. As
the stone is about to collide with the man made meat wall, George and
Josh both see the glimmer of the talisman. And as the stone is colliding
with their bodies and massive hearts, they barely touch the talisman
with their tips of their fingers (dual voip sound), and there's nothing
but silence. The act these two men performed was the most heroic act
Demon Julie has ever seen, and she rewarded the two newly translated
Demons, by translating the deadly, momentus rock sphere into some
unknown time and place, and effectively rescuing the team of explorers
left in the earth realm, just as a token of gratitude for the altruistic
behavior to their fellow human beings. Welcome to being NaMo Demons
George and Josh, I really do appreciate the support you provide for the
show, and I hope you enjoy the extra content that NaMo outer darkness
unlocks.

If you want a shout out, or a NaMo outer darkness translation story like
Julie, George and Josh, or even something more elaborate, check out
patreon.com and search for the Naked Mormonism Podcast.

I guess that concludes this episode. Join me next episode as we inch
closer and closer to the BoM analysis that I'm so excited about. Talk at
ya next time, here on the naked mormonism podcast.

Bonus Content

W. R. Hine 

Martin Harris introduced himself to

me, and said they were going to bring

the world from darkness into light.

Martin's wife cooked for them, and

one day while they were at dinner

she put one hundred and sixteen

pages, the first part they had

translated, in her dress bosom and

went out. They soon missed the one

hundred and sixteen pages and

followed her into the road and

demanded them of her. She refused,

and said if it was the Lord's work you

can translate them again, and I will

follow you to the ends of the earth. 

Dr. Seymour came along and she gave

them to him to read, and told him not

to let them go. Dr. Seymour lived one

and a half miles from me. He read

most of it to me when my daughter

Irene was born; he read them to his

patients about the country. It was a

description of the mounds about the

country and similar to the "Book of

Mormon." I doubt if the one hundred

and sixteen pages were included in

the "Book of Mormon." After I came

to Kirtland, in conversation with

Martin Harris, he has many times

admitted to me that this statement

about his wife and the one hundred

and sixteen pages, as above stated, is

true. I heard a man say who was a

neighbor to the Mormon Smith

family, in Palmyra, N.Y., that they

were thieves, indolent, the lowest

and meanest family he ever saw or

heard of. Hyrum was the best of the

family. Many letters were received

from Palmyra, stating the bad

character of the Smith's.
