---
layout: post
title: >
    CC - The Book of Mormon
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/6631-2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/cc-the-book-of-mormon
category: CC
date: 2015-11-15 07:52:13 +0000
---

Links:

UTLM source books list

http://www.utlm.org/onlineresources/bomindianorigins.htm

Welcome to this very special anniversary edition of the Naked Mormonism
Podcast. My name is Bryce Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me.

Today we have a very special episode planned. I want to start off by
thanking all of the listeners for staying with me through a year of
research, development, production, and listening. I've learned a lot,
and have had some very memorable moments while producing this podcast. I
know this isn't much of a milestone episode, but it feels significant to
me, and I feel like having a small celebration, which will be embodied
in this really special edition episode.

On this episode, we aren't going to be taking on the historical timeline
of Joseph Smith and the Mormon church like we do in regular episodes,
rather, we will be focusing on one topic, for the purpose of
deconstructing it as logically as possible. The topic we'll be
addressing on this episode is the Book of Mormon as a whole. Now, I know
that a lot of people that listen to this show, probably understand the
history of the church up to this point, and know the society that the
Book of Mormon came out of. However, there are a lot of things in the
Book of Mormon that I haven't directly addressed yet. In fact, I've been
purposefully neglecting the entire topic of the Book of Mormon itself,
for the purpose of compiling it all into one episode, which is what
we're going to try and tackle today.

There won't be any roundup, listener mail, or patreon shout outs this
episode, it's going to be just straight up analysis. We are going to try
and focus on the facts as much as possible. This is going to be as
objective as we possibly can be, without any pro-Mormon or anti-Mormon
slant. Let's just talk about the Book of Mormon standalone, and see how
it holds up to a skeptical analysis. So, let's just dive right in.

This show will be broken up into 3 main portions, and we'll examine the
facts, and discuss the pro, and anti-Mormon arguments for each of the
points. I'll try to keep my own bias absent, or disconnected from the
analysis as much as possible, because we just want to talk about the
facts of the Book of Mormon today. These three categories will break
down as follows: **historical context, authorship, and claims.**

We have a lot to talk about, and I'm not really sure how to get started,
so let's just start out by talking talking about the first category, the
historical context. We won't be talking about the Book of Mormon itself
for a minute here, because we need to set the stage of the timeframe it
was produced in.

When you consider the Book of Mormon, and Joseph Smith, there's no way
to fully understand them without understanding the burned over district
in New York, from whence the Book of Mormon came. This requires a little
bit of a step back in time, and some historical empathizing. The problem
with any historical narrative is knowing where to pick up the story,
because all history is interconnected. With the history of the church,
you can start with publishing the Book of Mormon, but it would be remiss
of us to ignore the first vision accounts. We can back it up further,
and say that the history of Mormonism starts with the birth of Joseph
Smith on December 23, 1805, but that would be entirely negligent of the
time frame and mindset that the Smith family was privey to in the burned
over district. If we go back further, we can talk about the protestant
religious revivals that were happening throughout the early American
settlements, but that tells us nothing about how or why Protestantism
exists, or what drove people to start their own religions in the wake of
the Catholic control over European nations. 

Like I said, it's hard to decide where to pick up a historical narrative
with everything so tightly intertwined. 

So, for the purposes of this episode, we're going to take a step back in
time to the settling of America, and how important religious liberty was
to some very important individuals at the time. We can start off with
talking about the Puritanical expansion of protestant Christians coming
over the Atlantic ocean seeking religious asylum. Most of the settlers
of America in the 17<sup>th</sup> century were European citizens that
had been under the rule of governments that were deeply tied with Roman
Catholocism. Most of these Protestant settlers hated the Catholic
church, and it's authoritarian absolutist rule, especially with the
Anglican church that was established as the church of England, whcih
made it the church of the entire British Empire. Now, when we look at
the United Kingdom today, it's vastly different than it was in the
17<sup>th</sup> and 18<sup>th</sup> centuries. Britain is a hollow shell
of what it used to be, in terms of landmass, population, and controlled
territories. 

We're talking about a time when most of Africa was under British rule,
all of India, most of the European nations that we consider soveriegn
today, all of which were under the rule of the British Monarchy. That's
how people were able to get the ships and funding necessary to brave the
Atlantic Ocean, and come settle the New World. The British Navy during
these times was not to be trifled with. In fact, they had the absolute
largest and most powerful navy in existence, bar none. They were one of
the wealthiest empires spanning thousands of miles, and controlling most
of the territory with naval superiority. Not one single nation or empire
could contend with the British Navy, which gave them a monopoly of the
waters, and put them at the forefront of the ever expanding global trade
industry. 

Well, this massive superiority allowed them the resources necessary to
expand their empire to the Americas. The first European settlers made
their way to Plymouth Massachusettes in 1620, and began settling the
territory. Things did not go well. A lot of people died from starvation,
dysentery, small pox, and other unpleasant diseases. Thanks to the
Native Americans, the Europeans were barely able to survive, and slowly
propogate. By this time, most of the Natives had died off from diseases
brought over from earlier exploratory groups. The Natives didn't have
the immune system that the Europeans had been cultivating for tens of
thousands of years, and they simply weren't prepared for the onslaught
of microorganic warfare that Europe wasn't even aware it was waging upon
the Natives. Some estimations say that hundreds of thousands of Natives
were killed, some put that number into few millions category. Some of
the highest estimations say that somewhere between 25, and 30 million
Native Americans died from old world diseases before the settlers could
even make their way out across the plains to the west coast. Wherever
that number really lies, doesn't really matter, because all that matters
is the aftermath of these millions of dead people. Joseph Stalin is
quoted with saying something along the lines of, "One death is a
tragedy, a million deaths is a statistic". Well in the case of the
Native Americans, that's all they were. Millions of people killed, that
didn't die through traditional warfare, just a statistic to us now.

This was truly the largest absentee genocide in all of human history.
Historians debate about the largest military genocide, or which was the
most powerful of all armies throughout antiquity. The Huns were pretty
amazing, conquering most of Eastern Europe, and Asia in the first
century. Before that, the Romans under Alexander the great killed a lot
of people. After both of those, the Kahn army is supposedly responsible
for killing somewhere between 10 and 30 million people throughout all of
their conquests under Gengis Kahn in the mid 13<sup>th</sup> century.
Those are some baffling numbers. Most of those people died by the sword
or spear as well. Now imagine all of the people that were killed by
those armies, all being combined into one statistic on one landmass, and
they were all slain by an invisible enemy. Estimates of life lost
throughout the entire second world war, sit somewhere between 50 to 60
million people, most of which were Russians. Most of those deaths were
from artillery and bombing, a lot were done by chemical warfare on the
front lines, now imagine that many people dying from the flu bug, or
small pox, or measels, or any number of other old world diseases that
the Native Americans weren't equipped to handle. 

The average large sports stadium can house anywhere from 25 to 50
thousand people. If you watch any major sporting event, a person can
scarcely wrap their mind around how many people that really is. It just
looks like a sea of faces with different colored clothes spotted
throughout masses. Now imagine a stadium ten times the size of that,
500,000 people. No single person can comprehend how many people that
really looks like. Now imagine that stadium of 500,000 people, all dying
in one or two months time. The largest gatherings of people we have on
record are hindu gatherings at the river Ganges for their ceremonial
bathing. If you haven't seen pictures of these gatherings, I would
recommend checking them out, because it's a truly incomprehensible
amount of people. The third largest of these was in 2004, called the
Simhastha Kumbh Mela during which something like 30 million Hindus
gathered in one place for ceremonial washing in the Ganges river. You
can't see that many people in any photo, because the space they take up
is just simply too great. But you can see thousands of photos of
different areas, that are just people, almost shoulder to shoulder, for
square miles, as far as the photo has resolution to show. 

I really hope you look up some of these pictures, because the number of
dead Native Americans doesn't truly come into perspective, unless you
can actually see what that many people alive looks like. It's completely
incomprehensible to see that many faces, and imagine them all dead from
horrible, and painful diseases. Something like 95% of all the Native
Americans died without ever having met a European.

Now, let's consider the practical logistics of the problems these bodies
create. We are one of the very few species that disposes of our dead,
and it's a practice that has many evolutionary benefits. Let's face it,
a person won't catch a disease from a dead body, if the body is covered
in dirt, or buried in a hole in the ground, so we bury our dead. Well,
if 95% of a Native American tribe dies, it's incumbent upon the
remaining 5% to either bury the dead, and move on with life surviving,
or vacate the area, and leave the problem for someone else. Well, both
of these happened to the luck, or dismay of the European settlers. 

As people began moving out to the west, and settling everywhere along
the way, they would come upon these Native American equivalent of ghost
towns, that were littered with dead bodies, either being eaten by
wildlife, or decomposing in the noonday sun. Keep in mind, this was
quite some time before Louis Pasteur and his pre-modern idea of germ
theory was popularized, or even conceived, which happened in mid to late
1800's. So, when the settlers would happen upon these native
civilizations that had been completely abandoned littered with bodies
that could be two weeks old, or 2 centuries old, they would
understandably have some questions. Questions like, who were these
people? Why did they leave? What killed them? Why didn't they bury the
bodies? And I'm sure there are some questions I can't even imagine. 

While some of these civilizations were abandoned, or every person in the
tribe had died, there were plenty more where the majority of the tribe
died off, but the remaining alive decided to stay where they were, and
bury the bodies in mass graves. We've uncovered a lot of mass graves in
our time during recorded history. Some of the more recent date back just
a few years to Rwanda. Others date back to Jewish mass graves during the
holocaust. Well, most of these graves are underground, and require
digging to reach. However, some are just thousands of human bodies,
piled on top of each other, and a bunch of dirt thrown on top of them,
making large mounds or hills filled with really cool stuff for
archeaologists to find.

Well, herein lies another problem, because now we have a bunch of post
enlightenment Europeans digging through dirt piles, uncovering skeletons
decorated in various Native American garb, and they're trying to apply
post-hoc reasoning to the existence of these mounds that were
essentially mass graves. They were finding all kinds of trinkets, and
drawings, and leather pouches with prized possessions in them, and all
manner of curious workmanships. The most amazing things that blew the
Europeans collective mind, were the ruins. Throughout both American
continents, there were massive ruins of pyramids, temples, and buildings
of gathering, worship, and inhabitation. While most Native tribes were
hunter-gatherer type tribes, there were some larger cities that were
much more modern, wherein empires were established, agriculture was
produced en mass, and people exchanged things with a fairly modern
bartering commodity system. Look at the Aztec, or Myan empires, they
were not so different from us, we just have a lot less hard evidence
about their day-to-day life as opposed to the evidence we have for other
groups of people like, say, the Roman empire.

Let me clarify really quickly, best estimations put North American
native populations topping out around 8 million people, the 30 million
number we talked about earlier includes both American continents, and
that's where a lot of this archeaological research was going on.
Archeaologists, and anthropologists were discovering abandoned ruins,
and mass graves all over both American continents, and they were coming
up with all kinds of ideas about how they could have gotten there, and
why they were abandoned. Most people that were studying the ruins and
whatnot at the time, had the writings of historians, and Spanish
conquistadors to go off of, but they had the same blind spot that we
deal with today. When it comes to chronicling the ancient civilizations
before the Aztec empire, it becomes very challenging, very quickly. They
didn't particularly have any writing that was standardized like it was
in many places in the old world. There are heiroglyphs in caves and on
major rock formations, but those are often times pictographic, and tell
a story in a way that can't be deciphered into typical linguistic
fashion, or if there is some kind of language recording events, it's
long dead, and anybody that spoke or wrote it died off centuries before
the European settlers could get to them.

If we look at it objectively, we have about 400 years of recorded
history dealing with various Native American tribes on record, and those
we have record of constitute a very small portion of the actual tribes
that existed. Our best estimations put the Natives coming over here
around 15,000 years ago on a land/ice bridge through the Bering Strait.
That means, we have European recordings of the existence and dealings of
Native American tribes for about 2.5% of the time of their actual
existence here, and those recordings only chronicle the most
influential, or largest of the tribes. If we extrapolate it out, in all
of our post-modern studies and archaeology, we know about the existence
of a very small percentage of the Native Americans, and of those, we
know about less than 1% of their actual day-to-day lives through first
hand experience that was recorded by post enlightenment scholars and
historians.

Consider the state that the Native American tribes were in at the time
European settlers encountered them. For the last little while we've been
talking about the massive amount of death that was happening throughout
both American continents due to old world diseases. Most of these
Natives were too busy burying their dead, or trying to find somewhere to
live without thousands of dead bodies surrounding them. They didn't
really have the time or infrastructure built to recover from such a
travesty. We're talking about 95% of all Native Americans dying in a
period of about 200 years. Consider how messed up Europe was during the
black plague, and they only lost 60% of their population, not 95% like
the Native Americans. Imagine being an alien race and landing in Europe
in 1355, a mere 2 years after the plague had wreaked most of it's havoc.
What would Europe look like? Would that be a proper snapshot of what
Europe was like before the plague, or would everything be in a perpetual
state of strife, and unrest? Piles of burned bodies would be everywhere,
infrastructure would be in shambles, education wouldn't be a priority
for anybody, the place would be an utter mess. If you were that alien
race, you would be positing all kinds of crazy theories that would
explain why the place was such a mess, even though you wouldn't be able
to look back in time to know the truth.

Well, when humans don't know something, or can't look back in time
somehow, they guess, and this hole in recorded history falls prey to
that human failing. People were coming up with all kinds of crazy
theories about how the Natives got there, and who built the cities and
mounds. A lot of people sincerely believed that white people came over
and ruled the Natives, and directed them to build everything that the
European settlers were finding. They sincerely thought that the Natives
were far too savage to actually be able to do all this amazing work and
architecture without the help of an enlightened group of white people. 

A compounding factor to these proposed theories is the belief structure
that most of these new settlers held. The people that settled the
American continent were almost exclusively followers of Judeo-Christian
religious sects, most being protestant, escaping the catholic regime
that dominated Europe. Well, something that is pervasive in Judaism, and
Christianity, is finding the lost tribes of Israel. A lot of Christian
religions will spread to a new area, and claim that the people there are
descendants of the lost tribes of Israel. Currently, Mormonism is doing
this with their proselyting campaigns in Asia, primarily with Russian
converts. 

Well, when Christians came over and settled both American continents, a
lot of them thought that these people must be the lost tribes of Israel.
This is made abundantly apparent by the books that were coming out of
the colonies in reaction to the evidence that they were uncovering
across the entire new world. These are some books that talk about
theories of where the Native Americans came from, along with their date
and place of publishing

Adair, James, *The History of the American Indians*, London, 1775.

  - Adair’s evidence for the Indian-Israelite theory consists of
    twenty-three parallels between Indian and Jewish customs. For
    example, he claims the Indians spoke a corrupt form of Hebrew,
    honored the Jewish Sabbath, performed circumcision, and offered
    animal sacrifice.

Boudinot, Elias, *A Star in the West; or a Humble Attempt to Discover
the Long Lost Ten Tribes of Israel*, Trenton, 1816.

  - He relies heavily on evidences compiled by James Adair. He also
    mentions the Indians’ lost book of God.

Cusick, David, *Sketches of the Ancient History of the Six Nations*,
Lewistone, NY, 1827.

  - Records Indian fables, which he believes, support the mound builder
    myth. One fable, for example, speaks of the descendants of two
    brothers continually at war with the other until one group is
    finally destroyed in North America.

Israel, Manasseh ben, *The Hope of Israel*, London, 1652 and 1792.

  - Includes story of a remnant of the ten tribes of Israel being
    discovered in Peru.

Priest, Josiah, *The Wonders of Nature and Providence, Displayed*,
Albany, 1825 and 1826.

  - A compilation of many previously published works, includes an
    extract from Francisco Clavigero's *History of Mexico* recounting
    the ancient Mexican traditions of idolatry and human sacrifice and a
    portion from Ethan Smith's *View of the Hebrews* detailing evidence
    that Indians were of Hebrew origin.

Smith, Ethan, *View of the Hebrews; or the Tribes of Israel in America*,
Poultney, VT, 1823 and 1825.

  - Ethan Smith's is by far the most important and interesting work
    dealing with the origin of the American Indians and the mound
    builders. Suggests that the first settlers of the New World were the
    lost ten tribes of Israel. Includes extracts from von Humboldt's
    description of Mexican antiquities, Atwater's description of the
    mounds, and evidence from Adair and Boudinot to connect Indians with
    the lost ten tribes. He also mentions the Indian legend of the lost
    book of God, which would one day be returned.

Thorowgood, Thomas, *Jews in America, or , Probabilities That the
Americans are of that Race*, London, 1652.

  - He mentions the notion that the gospel was anciently preached in
    America. Emphasized the millennialistic nature of his
    Indian-Israelite identification and the importance of the Indians'
    conversion to Christianity.

Yates, John and Joseph Moulton, *History of the State of New York*,
1824.

  - They describe mounds and fortifications in their state and
    neighboring states, as well as the ruins of an ancient city near
    Palenque. According to them, these mounds, part of a great chain
    running down through Mexico and into South America, were built by a
    separate race of white-skinned people who were destroyed by the
    Indians. They mention the discovery of hieroglyphic writing and
    mammoth bones, and include reports that Indians in certain locales
    possessed the signs and tokens of Freemasonry.

We opened this episode by talking about three portions that the show
will be broken up into. The first is historical context relating to
Joseph Smith, and the prevailing social and political views during his
life. Well, this list of books takes us from the first category of this
episode, being the historical context, and throws us into the authorship
of the Book of Mormon portion.

If any listeners are familiar with the Book of Mormon, hopefully you
will have recognized some of the themes described in the books listed
here. I should say that most of these books are archived, and can be
found in pdf format online. If you question any of the synopses that
were given, feel free to check out the books for yourself, and challenge
the parallels that are drawn. 

A lot of parallels to the Book of Mormon were just listed, and it should
be noted that every one of those books were published before the Book of
Mormon came along, and were used for casual reading, and school
textbooks alike because they encapsulated the prevailing theories to
explain the Native Americans, and the ruins they left behind up to that
point. 

We can look at the list and see the recurring themes, but there are a
few that stick out to anybody that researches Mormon history from both
the pro, and anti Mormon side. One that sticks out the most is "The View
of the Hebrews; or the Tribes of Israel in America" by Ethan Smith,
published in Poultney, VT 1823.

I'm going to read an excerpt from UTLM.org on an article that
deconstructs the Book of Mormon quite well. This passage is in reference
to Ethan Smith's book.

"LDS General Authority B. H. Roberts wrote extensively about the
parallels between [*View of the
Hebrews*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/viewofthehebrews_ub016.htm) and
the Book of Mormon (see [*Studies of the Book of
Mormon*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/studiesofthebookofmormon_xb081.htm)).
Rev. Robert Hullinger gave the following summary of B. H. Robert's
parallels:

According to Roberts's later studies, some features of [*View of the
Hebrews*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/viewofthehebrews_ub016.htm) are
paralleled in the Book of Mormon. (1) Indians buried a book they could
no longer read. (2) A Mr. Merrick found some dark yellow parchment
leaves in "Indian Hill." (3) Native Americans had inspired prophets and
charismatic gifts, as well as (4) their own kind of Urim and Thummim and
breastplate. (5) Ethan Smith produced evidence to show that ancient
Mexican Indians were no strangers to Egyptian hieroglyphics. (6) An
overthrown civilization in America is to be seen from its ruined
monuments and forts and mounds. The barbarous tribes—barbarous because
they had lost the civilized arts—greeting the Europeans were descendants
of the lost civilization. (7) Chapter one of [*View of the
Hebrews*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/viewofthehebrews_ub016.htm) is
a thirty-two page account of the historical destruction of Jerusalem.
(8) There are many references to Israel's scattering and being
"gathered" in the last days. (9) Isaiah is quoted for twenty chapters to
demonstrate the restoration of Israel. In Isaiah 18 a request is made to
save Israel in America. (10) The United States is asked to evangelize
the native Americans. (11) Ethan Smith cited Humboldt's New Spain to
show the characteristics of Central American civilization; the same are
in the Book of Mormon. (12) The legends of Quetzacoatl, the Mexican
messiah, are paralleled in the Book of Mormon by Christ's appearing in
the western hemisphere. . . . Roberts came to recognize that, at least
in the case of Ethan Smith's book, such works were widely available
([*Joseph Smith's Response to
Skepticism*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/josephsmithsresponsetoskepticism_xb139.htm),
by Robert N. Hullinger, Signature, 1992, pp. 183-184).

For more information the similarities between the Book of Mormon
and [*View of the
Hebrews*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/viewofthehebrews_ub016.htm),
see [*Joseph Smith and the Origins of the Book of
Mormon*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/josephsmithandtheoriginsofthebom_xb180.htm),
by David Persuitte."

If you happen to question the historian that conducted the study, I
would just encourage you to look up B. H. Roberts. He was a believing
member of the church, one of the quorum of the twelve, and quite revered
as a historian. This is a excerpt taken from Wikipedia about his
scholarship related to the Book of Mormon, and the View of the Hebrews.

"Although Roberts continued to testify to the truth of the [Book of
Mormon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Mormon), a foundational
work of [Mormonism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mormonism), he also
wrote three studies, unpublished until 1985, that wrestled with Book of
Mormon problems. The first, "Book of Mormon Difficulties: A Study," was
a 141-page manuscript written in response to a series of questions by an
inquirer, referred to Roberts by church president [Heber J.
Grant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heber_J._Grant). When Roberts
confessed that he had no answer for some of the difficulties, and
the [general
authorities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_authority) chose to
ignore them, Roberts produced "A Book of Mormon Study," a treatise of
more than 400 pages. In this work he compared the Book of Mormon to the
earlier-published [*View of the
Hebrews*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/View_of_the_Hebrews), written
by [Ethan
Smith](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethan_Smith_\(clergyman\)), and
found significant similarities between them. Finally, Roberts wrote "A
Parallel," a condensed version of his larger study, which demonstrated
eighteen points of similarity between the two books, and in which he
reflected that the imaginative [Joseph
Smith](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Smith) might have written
the Book of Mormon without divine
assistance.<span id="anchor"></span>[\[27\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B._H._Roberts#cite_note-27)
"

I would encourage anybody doubting him to look up any of the works
listed to criticize his scholarship. He's one of the most renowned
believing Mormon scholars out there, and what he writes about definitely
needs to be wrestled with by any other believing Mormon.

So, let's talk about the View of the Hebrews and Ethan Smith. First
thing to point out is the time and location of the publication of this
book. It was published in Poultney Vermont, in 1823. In order to
understand this fully, we need to bring up our buddy Oliver Cowdery.
Cowdery was living in Poultney at this time. This was 6 years before him
and Joseph would reportedly meet up to translate the Book of Mormon in
April of 1829. While location doesn't necessarily imply correlation,
there are some other factors worth considering, like the fact that Ethan
Smith was the pastor over Cowdery's church when he published the book.
It's hard to believe that Cowdery didn't know about the View of the
Hebrews while he was attending Ethan Smith's congregation. 

This leads a lot of people to believe that The View of the Hebrews was a
source text for the book of Mormon. Another connection that wasn't
listed in the similarities is the extensive quoting from Isaiah. That is
present in Ethan Smith's book, and the Book of Mormon in multiple
places. While these are fairly strong connections, the theory has one
point where it fails. This is a point that other books actually surpass
it in correlation to the Book of Mormon, and we'll talk about the point
very soon. But first, we need to talk about another authorship theory,
and it's strength.

Most people that follow this show from the beginning probably espouse
the Solomon Spaulding Manuscript Found authorship theory of the Book of
Mormon. Well, it's not hard to do given the available evidence which
we'll discuss momentarily. But, I will start out by saying, most
scholars, both believers, and non believers don't agree with this theory
for lack of evidence. I'll say right at the outset that it posits the
existence of a book that we don't have, and the entire theory is
contingent upon that manuscript existing, and coinciding timeframes
between a man named Solomon Spaulding, and Sidney Rigdon.

If you're looking for a proper deconstruction of the theory, listen to
episode 14 and 15, and you'll become much more familiar with all of the
evidence available in favor of the theory. For this episode, we'll just
briefly cover it, and move on to bigger and better things. 

Where the theory first gained traction was in the book Mormonism
Unveiled by Eber D. Howe, published in 1834. This was one of the
earliest full book publications that was considered anti-Mormon. Howe
was a war of 1812 army veteran turned editor of the Painsville Telegraph
newspaper. He was considered a vitriolic skeptic of religion in general,
and honestly he had a bit of an axe to grind against the church. The
reason was because his wife, sister, and and niece all converted to
early Mormonism, spurring him to investigate Mormonism. Here enters a
man named Doctor Philastus Hurlbut. Hurlbut wasn't a doctor, he was
named Doctor at birth, but it's not like the title of Doctor really held
much merit back then anyway. 

Hurlbut converted to Mormonism in 1833, and was recruited as a
missionary to proselyte in a town named Conneaut Ohio. This was the town
in which Solomon Spaulding was living before he died in 1816. Hurlbut
ran into a problem when he went preaching Mormonism here, and we'll read
some quotes from affidavits that Hurlbut collected later that year
before we talk about what happened to him. These affidavits are taken
from Mormonism Unveiled by E. D. Howe.

This is from a man named Aron Wright

"In conclusion I will observe that the names and most of the historical
part of the Book of Mormon is as familiar to me as most modern history
 \[if\] is not Spaldings writings copied it is the same as he wrote and
if Smith was inspired I think it was by the same Spirit that Spalding
possessed which he confessed to be the love of money,"

This is from a man named John Spalding, Solomon Spaulding's brother.

""He then told me had he been writing a book, which he intended to have
printed, the avails of which he thought would enable him to pay all his
debts. The book was entitled the ‘Manuscript Found,’ of which he read to
me many passages. It was an historical romance of the first settlers of
America, endeavoring to show that the American Indians are the
descendants of the Jews, or the lost tribes. It gave a detailed account
of their journey from Jerusalem, by land and sea, till they arrived in
America, under the command of NEPHI AND LEHI. They afterwards had
quarrels and contentions, and separated into two distinct nations, one
of which he denominated Nephites and the other Lamanites. Cruel and
bloody wars ensued, in which great multitudes were slain. They buried
their dead in large heaps, which cause the mounds so common in this
country."

This is from a man named Henry Lake who was a close acquaintance of
Spalding.

“This book \[‘Manuscript Found’\] represented the American Indians as
the descendants of the lost tribes, gave an account of their leaving
Jerusalem, their contentions and wars, which were many and great. One
time, when he was reading to me the tragic account of Laban, I pointed
out to him what I considered an inconsistency, which he promised to
correct; but by referring to the Book of Mormon, I find to my surprise
that it stands there just as he read it to me then.... I was astonished
to find the same passages in it that Spaulding had read to me more than
twenty years before, from his ‘Manuscript Found."

This was a very close friend of Spalding's, Oliver Smith.

“All his \[Solomon Spaulding’s\] leisure hours were occupied in writing
a historical novel, founded upon the first settlers of this country. He
said he intended to trace their journey from Jerusalem, by land and sea,
till their arrival in America, give an account of their arts, sciences,
civilization, wars and contentions. In this way, he would give a
satisfactory account of all of the old mounds, so common to this
country.... Nephi and Lehi were by him represented as leading
characters, when they first started for America"

Like I said, hearing those affidavits, it's kind of hard to disagree
with the Solomon Spalding theory of authorship. What's more, we have
some other evidence that put Spalding, and Rigdon in the same place at
the same time. One is a testimonial of seeing Rigdon and Spalding at the
same publishing house/bookstore in Ohio. The other shows an unclaimed
mail list in Conneaut with the names of Sidney Rigdon and Solomon
Spalding on the same list, meaning they used the same post office.

The only reason we draw connections to Sidney Rigdon and Solomon
Spalding is to support the claim that Rigdon, and Joseph met up before
1829, and collaborated to write the Book of Mormon. There are a couple
of testimonies that place Rigdon and Smith in the same place at the same
time, and once again, I'll just refer you to episode 15 to get the
entire rundown of those connections.

So let's go back to Doctor Philastus Hurlbut. He was called as a
missionary to Conneaut, where he preached the Book of Mormon, and
repeatedly ran into people that would tell him they were familiar with
what he was preaching. So, Hurlbut went back to Kirtland to confront
Joseph with these problems, and ask for an explanation as to why they
were saying these damning things about the Book of Mormon. Joseph
responded by excommunicating Hurlbut, and Hurlbut took that as enough of
a reason to investigate the problems further. At that point, he went
back to Conneaut, and collected the affidavits we read earlier, among
many others, and gave them to Eber Howe for use in Mormonism Unveiled,
which was published less than 6 months after these affidavits were
collected.

The evidence to support the Spalding Manuscript Found theory relies
heavily on testimony, which we know to be one of the least reliable
sources of historical evidence. The extant theory that isn't
testimonial, only goes as far as placing Spalding and Rigdon in the same
place at the same time. We don't have the actual manuscript in our
hands, because the theory posits that Rigdon took the only existing
manuscript from the publisher after Spalding died. 

Situations like this, no matter how believable or not, are not what
historians like to align with. They like cold hard evidence that doesn't
rely on fallible persons testimony to posit the historical theory. Well,
there are some other books that we can look at, and they have only
recently come into view with the help of large data analysis, and
literary criticism. There is a lot of really good evidence to discuss,
and we'll get to it soon. But for now, let's move onto the believers
perspective of how the Book of Mormon came about.

True believing Mormons understand that the Book of Mormon came about
with a very set sequence of events. These events reportedly started in
1820, and by September of 1827 Joseph pulled the plates out of the
ground where they had been kept in a stone box for almost 1500 years,
along with the Urim and Thummim, a breastplate, and possibly the sword
of Laban. Once the plates were out of the ground, Joseph got them home,
and translated them with the help of a few scribes. This led to the Book
of Mormon being published in March of 1830, and the establishment of the
Church of Christ in April of that same year.

We've covered all of this in great detail, so I won't rehash it now, but
let's take a step back and ask where the plates came from, and why they
were buried in a box. We've covered this as well, so bear with me for a
minute as I set up the scene once again. In order to understand how the
plates got there, we need to go back to about 2500 b.c.e. Iraq. That
puts us in Babylon, right before the tower of Babel fell, with our focus
on the Jaredites. These were ancient hebrews that were so righteous that
god didn't confound their language, rather, he sent them to America to
settle the promised land. The Jaredites spend 344 days locked up in
postdiluvian submarines with lots of animals, crossing the Atlantic
ocean. Once they arrived, they settled and exterminated themselves with
dozens of conflicts. They recorded their history on a set of metal
plates, and left them in plain sight for somebody to find. Flash cut to
600 b.c.e., and Lehi's family comes over to America, after attaining a
set of brass plates with the old testament on them, and they settle
down. A few years after settling, and some wars, a scouting party finds
the plates left behind by the Jaredites, and brings them to the Nephite
leader for translation and safekeeping.

Just to be clear, this is our second set of plates we're talking about.
There were the plates of the Jaredites, and the brass plates that Lehi's
family brought over from Jerusalem, that's two full sets of metal plates
with religious inscriptions on them. During the time that the Nephites
and Lamanites were fighting and building and destroying civilizations,
they were recording their own history on sets of plates. This time frame
spans from 600 b.c.e. - 130 b.c.e. The Nephites recorded everything they
did on a set of plates that were referred to as the small plates. The
name is a bit of a misnomer, because we aren't just talking about a few
leaves of metal here, these were entire books compiled together,
engraved by scribes for hundreds of years, chronicling everything from
their military tactics, to the animals they kept and bred, to the names
of the judges that were ruling over the land. This was a lot of plates,
all being stored away for safe keeping. For clarification purposes, the
small plates made up the first few books of the current book of Mormon,
listed as follows: 1<sup>st</sup> Nephi, 2<sup>nd</sup> Nephi, Jacob,
Enos, Jarom, and Omni.

Then, a man comes along named Mormon around 385 c.e., and he is tasked
with gathering all of the plates listed up to this point, and abridging
them into a single volume on gold plates. The next book in the current
Book of Mormon is called Words of Mormon, and basically what it does, is
tell us the difference between the small and the large plates, and tells
why Mormon is recording things as he's recording them. This is the
transition period between the small and large plates in the abridging
process for Mormon. 

Then, the book of Mormon moves into the abrigement of the large plates,
which make up the books: Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, 3<sup>rd</sup> Nephi,
and 4<sup>th</sup> Nephi. Then, according to the Book of Mormon, Mormon
is about to die in a battle so he hands off the plates to his son
Moroni, but not before writing his own memior entitled the Book of
Mormon. This isn't the entire Book of Mormon that we've been talking
about, it's just little 18 page book in the Book of Mormon, called the
Book of Mormon. Mormon writes this memior, hands the entire work he's
doing with the gold plates, off to his son Moroni. 

At this point, Moroni takes the plates of the Jaredites from 2500
b.c.e., that were almost 2900 years old by this point, and translates
them into the second to last book in the Book of Mormon, called the book
of Ether. Then Moroni adds his own book, along with a promise about
faith to finish up the last 12 pages of the book of Mormon, and then the
entire tome of history known as the gold plates is done. Moroni takes
the completed work to the hill Cumorah where some 2 million people have
just died in a massive battle in current day Manchester New York, and
buries them in a stone box for Joseph to find around 1400 years later. 

This is where Joseph was led to dig the plates out of the ground, so he
could begin the work that god had set out for him to perform in
restoring the original gospel. Keep the idea of all of these plates in
mind for when we move onto the third portion of the show talking about
claims in the book.

For now, let's talk about the authorship from Joseph's perspective. In
1828, Martin Harris begins scribing for Joseph, and after 3 months of
hard work, and 116 pages of completed first draft manuscript, Martin
takes the manuscript home with him to show it to his wife, and possibly
some other people. Martin reportedly loses the manuscript, and the gift
of translation is taken away from Joseph until Oliver Cowdery comes
along in spring 1829. Once Cowdery arrives on scene, Martin Harris is
cut out of the authorship process, and everything kicks into high gear.
In the time from May to August in 1829, Joseph and Oliver translate the
entire text of the Book of Mormon, and send it to the printer for
publishing. 

Before talking about the printers manuscript, we need to discuss the
order that the books in the Book of Mormon were written in once Oliver
and Joseph teamed up. They didn't just start at the beginning with the
first book of Nephi, and go straight through to the Book of Moroni and
call it a day. 

What actually happened was they young men started out writing
3<sup>rd</sup> Nephi, or what was called the large plates. That was the
first set of books written. Then, they moved on and included the book of
Ether, and the final Book of Moroni, and then they went back and
authored from the beginning, starting with 1<sup>st</sup> Nephi, and
ending with the book of Omni. Then, they wrote the transition book
called The Words of Mormon, in order to smooth the transition from the
small plates to the large plates. After all this, it was done and was
sent off to the printer for publishing. 

One may ask why the book was written in such odd order. Well, from the
believing Mormon side, this really isn't discussed much. Most believing
members understand the translation process as being much more
straight-forward than that.

And that's it for this episode. Hopefully everybody noticed the never
before seen title name of the episode. This episode title was preceded
by CC meaning clean cut, just like the missionaries. Any episode that
you see in the episode list from now on that is labeled with "CC" won't
be explicit, and won't be offensive to believing Mormon ears. One of the
main criticisms leveled against this show is it's entire blindspot in
audience of believing members. Let's face it, when you follow the
tenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, any swearing
or vulgarity turns you off immediately. In answer to this criticism, I
say that I enjoy being able to relax and rant about things I'm
passionate about, without censoring myself. I don't create this show for
the listening audience, I create it to help with my own catharsis for
the anger I feel for being lied to by the church. I also want any guests
to feel able to open up, and not feel constrained by censorship.

Well, I have to listen to criticisms about the show, because often times
the criticism points out a weakness that needs to be addressed. Well,
this is how I'm going to address the criticism that the show turns
people off with the cursing and vulgarity. Any episodes that starts with
"CC" in the title will be an episode that tries to take on one major
problem in the church, without any information or words that will turn
off true believing members. 

Interview with David Michael

had abundance of **curious workmanship** therein, such as surpassed the
comprehension of all the wise men of the east, from the beginning to
this day. - Late War

For the savages put the burning brand to the houses, from which they
could not flee, **and burnt them alive therein**. And the **flames** and
the smoke arose\! and their cries and their groans reached the high
chancery of heaven, Where they **will stand recorded, until the coming
of that Day for which all other days were made**. - Late War

And **it came to pass that one **other **ship **also did sail forth; and
whither she did go, ***we know not***. And it came to pass that in this
year there were many people who went forth into the
land ***northward***.** **-BoM, but this is in the Late War -** It came
to pass, that** **one of the strong ships** of the king had approached
the country of the ***south***, - Late War

And thus we did **go** forth **with all our might against** the
Lamanites, who were in the **city** of Manti – BoM, but this is in the
Late War - Lo\! we are stronger than the host of Columbia; therefore,
let us **go with all our might against** their chief **city**, and make
capture thereof 

And it came to pass, that a **great multitude** **flocked** to
the **banners** of the great Sanhedrin  - Late War

**the fourth day of** this **seventh month**, **which is** in the tenth
year of the reign of the judges. - BoM, But, this is from the Late War -
**the fourth day of** the **seventh month**, **which is** the birth day
of Columbian Liberty and Independence

But if, peradventure, we should be overcome, even then shall not the
sacred**cause of LIBERTY** perish, neither shall the people of Columbia
be disheartened. - Late War

Now these wonderful torpedoes were made partly of **brass** and partly
of iron, and were cunningly contrived with **curious works**, like unto
a **clock**; and as it were a large **ball**. - Late War, but this is in
the BoM - And it came to pass that as my father arose in the morning,
and went forth to the tent door, to his great astonishment he beheld
upon the ground a **round ball** of**curious workmanship**; and it was
of fine **brass**. And within the ball were **two spindles**

And **it came to pass that in the same year that the people
of *****Nephi*** had peace restored unto them, - BoM, but this is from
the Late War - But **it came to pass, in the same year, that the people
of *****Columbia*** were revenged of the evil: 

Then shall thy name be **proclaimed** with the sound of the trumpet
throughout all the earth ; and **thou *****shalt
be***** a *****prince***** and a ruler over this people**. - Late War.
But this is in the BoM - ...on the morrow I shall **proclaim** unto this
my people out of mine own mouth
that**thou *****art***** a *****king***** and a ruler over this
people**, whom the Lord our God hath given us. 

And so the ***judgment***** of the Lord fell upon them** for their
unrighteousness, and for their wicked and murderous deeds. - Late War

**Nevertheless, it came to pass that *****Pahoran*** was appointed by
the voice of the people to be **chief *****judge*** and a governor over
the people of Nephi. - BoM

**sent a proclamation** throughout ... the land; ... **And it came to
pass that** **thousands did** ***flock unto his standard*** \[of
liberty\] ... they ... went down with their armies – BoM
