---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 22 - Priestcraft Hypocrisy - A Spine is Grown and Broken'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-22-priestcraft-hypocrisy-spine-grown-broken/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-22-priestcraft-hypocrisy-a-spine-is-grown-and-broken
category: History
date: 2015-08-28 03:36:55 +0000
---

Ep 22 -- Priestcraft Hypocrisy -- A Spine is Grown and Broken

On this episode, we talk about the people that Joe named to be his
primary persecutors in Colesville, N.Y. Joe has to give a revelation to
lift everybody\'s spirits, which results in the introduction of
\'priestcraft\', and the first real insurrection. Ollie opposes Joe, and
Joe breaks his newly formed spine, like usual.

Website nakedmormonismpodcast.com\
\
Twitter \@NakedMormonism\
\
Facebook https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311\
\
Patreon patreon.com/nakedmormonism\
\
Outro music used with permission\

Links:

FairMormon on Joseph Smith persecution

<http://blog.fairmormon.org/2008/03/27/the-bainbridge-conspiracy/>

\"The Mormons or Latter-Day Saints, in the Valley of the Great Salt
Lake: A History of Their Rise and Progress, Peculiar Doctrines, Present
Condition.\" (1854)\
<https://archive.org/details/mormonsorlatterd00gunn>\

Welcome to episode 22 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, I\'m Bryce
Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me.

Last Episode, we covered the two and a half month period from Early
April, to late June 1830. From the first congregation of the church, to
casting out demons, to two trials and acquittals, Joe had a very busy
Spring that year. It\'s taken us a while to get to this point, but now
we can really see Joe start to embody the personality of the token cult
leader that he slowly became. So far, he\'s had some personality traits
that have been leaning in his favor of becoming this cult leader,
however, he hasn\'t actually had the infrastructure built under his
control, to actually lead anybody more than just his closest friends
that believed everything he said. Well, it takes a lot of work and
travel to set up such an infrastructure. I guess it\'s either work by
Joe himself, or just being able to outsource the work by using his
closest friends that had a special place in the church. I mean, we know
that Joe hated doing work, but he liked giving commands, and was good
and convincing at it apparently. Giving commands in order to build an
empire on, is exactly what he had been trying to do for so long, but now
he had a tool. Not just a tool like Precious or Mr. Hat, because those
weren\'t very compelling, when it came to trying to legitimize Joe to
newcomers. I\'m talking about a powerful physical tool that could be
used control the very hearts and minds of these newcomers. It was a
book.

Many people in the past have stood on the mantle of the bible, and have
used it to build entire empires of theocratic rule. A religious text is
something that can be so useful to the person preaching from it. The
bible and book of mormon are written in ways that allow and almost
require a person to think deeply and introspectively. There\'s enough
material in them to extract pretty much anything wanted out of the
chapter/verse like structure. For example, you can rationalize the
Isrealites following the command of god to go kill the Canaanites, down
to the suckling children, if you only look a few verses later in
Deuteronomy 21:8-9, this is what it says \"8) Forgive Your people Israel
whom You have redeemed, O LORD, and do not place the guilt of innocent
blood in the midst of Your people Israel.\' And the blood guiltiness
shall be forgiven them. 9) So you shall remove the guilt of innocent
blood from your midst, when you do what is right in the eyes of the
LORD.\" Once you read that, you can justify killing people, or taking
innocent blood, because things can be interpretted so many ways when
reading a holy book. The point is, when somebody professes to understand
that holy book better than most, other people tend to fall in line
behind that person, because they believe that it\'ll somehow help them
become more godly, or become more like the person they\'re trying to
emulate. A charismatic Jesus preacher can gain a pretty large following
running off just the bible. Now picture how much more powerful that
preacher becomes, when he understands the bible, and god, so well, that
god came to him to write another testament of Jesus Christ. Picture
being the religious sect that worships the old testament in all its
horrible glory, the New testament with its ass-kickin messiah, and
torture porn ending, and the new NEW testament, Jesus in \'Merica.

That\'s the platform Joe was running on. He was so righteous and pious,
that God and Jesus came to him, to be the next author in the long lineup
of authors that make up the bible, and Joe could work that position like
a charisma seeping, fame-whore. This is how he could gain a following,
but also serves to explain a little bit about the so called
\"Persecution\" that Joe had to endure up to this point.

The problem was, Joe was claiming that he was so righteous, that he was
given magic powers by Almighty God, to write a book, in the same way he
looked for buried treasure, and then charge people money for it. That
didn\'t sit well with people that knew Joe\'s history, or were familiar
with his character. That\'s precisely why these people took him to trial
twice in one week, basically for being a bold-faced fraud. The people
didn\'t like being lied to, and they knew Joe was lying through his
teeth the instant he said he had found buried gold plates, and
translated them into a holy third testament of Jesus. Honestly, I don\'t
particularly blame them.

Dr. Oz recently went to trial for endorsing remedies to cure actual
illnesses that don\'t work, yet he still has a tv show wearing his
scrubs that have never had blood on them, and continues to pull in a
multi-million dollar salary, even though it\'s been demonstrated that
he\'s a fraud to a certain extent. Well, Joe was just an early 19^th^
century snake oil salesman like Oz is today, however, he had a special
new Jesus book to help him claim divinity in his practices.

So, let\'s move on to what Joe and Co. Were up to after all that
happened last episode. Joe had been through a trial that was demanded by
a mob, and got off on a technicality. Naturally, the mob wasn\'t
satisfied with what had happened, so they were seeking retribution for
this little lapse in the judicial system. Everybody in town knew that
Joe was a fraud, and had been for quite some time. Now he had taken his
fraud activities to the next level by peddling a book that he came up
with, in the same exact way he had hunted for buried treasure, the rock
in the hat. For the most part, the people of Colesville weren\'t buying
it. They weren\'t even renting it, they just rejected what Joe was
claiming outright because of little more than his reputation. They knew
him as a fraud, and they didn\'t need to read his fraudulent bible
fan-fiction in order to determine it, they just knew. Well, Joe
couldn\'t just let this so-called \'persecution\' go unfed. He couldn\'t
just let the fire in the town die, he had to go in and stoke the flames
a little more. That\'s right, less than a week after he was basically
chased out of town by an angry mob, after he had escaped the legal
system twice, Joe returned to Colesville, along with Ollie Cowdung
Allover, to reap a few very young seeds that were planted during Joe\'s
time there. This later journey, a mere week or two after the trials, was
an immediate failure, thanks, once again, to the angry mob.

The Mormon home base in Colesville was the Knight household, which is
probably where they held their congregations. See, the entire Knight
family had converted, along with some of their friends, the Jolly\'s and
Richard Peterson, and Joe considered this one of his three
congregations. They may, or may not, have been having actual sunday
meetings as mandated by Joseph, regardless, they were considered his
third flock of early Mormonites.

Well, in order to harvest these recently planted seeds of faith, Joe
brought his tool, Ollie, to baptize and confirm everybody that the
Knights and Jollys had been talking to. But, upon arrival, the mob
almost instantly gathered at the Knight house. Somebody must have seen
Joe wandering into town, or maybe it was just a rumor that was
circulated, but the townspeople wanted Joe the fuck out of Colesville.
Let\'s read from the History of the Church vol. 1, to understand how Joe
recounts the situation.

\"Further Molestation at Colesville by Mobs---The Revelation Embodying
the Vision of Moses.

Second Flight from Colesville.

After a few days I returned to Colesville, in company with Oliver
Cowdery, for the purpose of confirming those whom we had been forced to
leave for a time. We had scarcely arrived at Mr. Knight\'s, when the mob
was seen collecting together to oppose us, and we considered it wisdom
to leave for home, which we did, without even waiting for any
refreshments. Our enemies pursued us, and it was oftentimes as much as
we could do to elude them. However, we managed to get home, after having
traveled all night, except a short time, during which we were forced to
rest ourselves under a large tree by the wayside, sleeping and watching
alternately.\"

This mob hated Joe, and the Book of Mormon enough, that they resorted to
literally chasing them out of town a second time. I also think it\'s
funny how Joe records it, \"we considered it wisdom to leave for home\".
It\'s just hilarious that he tells it like he was in control of the
situation the whole time. It\'s pretty clear that the mob literally
forced them out of town, and Joe and Ollie didn\'t have much say in the
situation. I mean, what could they do? They could either leave town, or
get the shit kicked out of them, or possibly even get lynched by the
mob. There really wasn\'t a choice there, unless Joe was willing to face
his martyrdom this early in his journey. But let\'s face it, Joe never
faced an actual martyrdom, even when he was supposedly martyred,
there\'s no way he would just sit there and take it like some kind of
Ammonite, or self-imolator, at this early stage in his journey. He had
the sense to turn tail and make like a tree and get the fuck out of
there. Anyway, I\'m not sure exatly where Joe was calling home at this
point. It\'s recorded that they travelled all night and arrived home.
However, Colesville is 95 miles from Fayette, 148 from
Manchester/Palmyra, and 375 miles from Harmony, PA. Harmony was where
Joe was calling home only a few months prior, and directly after this.
Let\'s assume the most logical thing, that Joe was calling Harmony home
during this time, it should have taken him and Ollie a solid 100 hours
of walking to get there. How that was done in one night with very little
rest, the world may never know. Maybe it was done by the same way that
Joe was able to run for 3 miles with 220 lb gold plates under his arm,
only 3 years prior to this scenario, but I suppose that\'s just
speculation.

Let\'s continue in the History of the Church vol.1 page 97.

\"Reflections on Persecution.

Thus were we persecuted on account of our religious faith---in a country
the Constitution of which guarantees to every man the indefeasible right
to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience---and by
men, too, who were professors of religion, and who were not backward to
maintain the right of religious liberty for themselves, though they
could thus wantonly deny it to us.\"

Alright, let\'s talk about this for a minute. First, Joe getting off on
technicalities, is a perfect demonstration of his religious liberty in
the country. His rights were never violated during everything we\'ve
talked about so far. Secondly, last episode I said that I couldn\'t
really understand why these people hated Joe so much. I\'m getting a
better grasp on it, but it seems like there might be something more to
it. Maybe there\'s some magic key that made Joe such a pariah, or maybe
I\'m just not seeing the picture as a whole. Or, maybe it\'s what I was
told about Joe growing up that\'s currently obfuscating my view of the
situation now.

We\'re taught in the church that Joe was a holy and pious prophet of
God. He was unflappable and infallible, and every bit of persecution he
endured was completely unfounded, and was therefore incited by the devil
himself. When you read Joe\'s versions, it was always the devil, or evil
designing persons, or something to that effect. Joe, and the church by
extension, completely remove the human element from the entire equation.
Joe was a person and we have to try and get into his mind. What\'s more,
everybody that was \'persecuting\' him was an individual person too. I
don\'t know exactly what was going through Joe\'s mind, however, we can
surmise that he asserted his convictions with a full heart, and full
intent. Whether or not he actually believed his own bullshit is another
discussion entirely. That being said, I think it might be even harder to
get into the minds of the people in the mob. They weren\'t just a
faceless mob, they were bakers, and farmers, and teachers, and all kinds
of people in a regular small community for every other minute of their
lives that they weren\'t part of this mob. My question about it is, why
did these people hate Joseph Smith so much?

I know when a person feels threatened, they will go to some pretty
extreme lengths to ensure their safety. Even if the threat is just an
idea, existentially it has the same effect on the acting agents. So is
this the heart of the matter, when it comes to these people wanting to
get rid of Joe so much? I\'m really trying to gain a grasp on it. Did
the people of Colesville honestly think that their faith was in this
much jeapordy? Was it enough that they thought Joe was going to pull
them away from their existing faith? Or was there something else to it?
I\'m asking this in an honest pursuit of the actual answer. The only
thing that I can bring myself to think of it, was the townspeople must
have been afraid of a wolf in treasure seeker\'s clothing. I mean let\'s
face it, when you have the right religion, every other religion out
there is clearly of the devil. Anybody raised in a more fundamentalist
religion of any type should be able to empathize with this. Shit, the
LDS church calls the catholic church \"The Great and Abominable Church\"
for that same reason. I think these people just saw Joe as clearly
possessed by the devil, and acting on carnal desires alone. He was just
there to bring the country to it\'s knees with the newest wave of a
false Jesus, to consume it\'s way across the burned-over district, like
so many before Mormonism had. If they truly thought that Joe was sent
by, possessed by, or controlled by the devil in any way shape or form,
this level of hatred against Joe seems justified, in a primitive mindset
sort of way.

I wonder if he was labeled with the same label that every threat to
society is labeled by overly conservative people. I wonder if anybody
called him the anti-christ for what he was doing. It seems like that
opinion would have been enough of a motivating factor alone to make the
mob hate Joe, and forcably devolve him to the level of pariah, that he
never ultimately recovered from. Like I\'ve said before, he was a
polarizing individual. The people that knew him, or had ever been burned
by his shenanigans, must have hated the very thought of him. Put
yourself in their shoes. Picture the person you hate most on the entire
planet. They could be somebody you know, or just the idea of somebody,
like hitler or something. Now picture that person coming to you with a
book in their hand, that they wrote mind you, calling it a new testament
of Jesus Christ, and calling you to repentance, thus completely shaking
the foundation of your deeply held religious beliefs. You either agree
with that person, and follow them, or you hate them, and do whatever
necessary to get rid of them. People that lived in 1830 aren\'t much
different than we are today, arguably they\'re no different. They\'re
subject to the same tendencies and emotions that we are subject to
today, they simply had less tools to deal with reality than we have.
Well, I think this gives us some insight into Joseph Smith, and his
character.

Beyond that, Joe had to practice. He had been swindling people out of
habit and necessity for most of his formative years, but he had never
tried to purchase somebody\'s soul with his own church before. When he
was first starting out, he could only get his best friends to join this
crazy new Jesus cult. But of course, as he practiced, and gained more
followers, he got better and better at his bullshit. There was also a
degree of separation that can\'t be ignored. The top of his pyramid was
formed out of the few people that he trusted the most, and by extension,
they spent a lot of time with him. The people that were closest to him,
like Oliver Cowdery, Emma Smith, the Whitmer family, were the most
capable of calling Joe out on his bullshit, and whenever they did
throughout the history, massive schisms happened, and rival factions of
Mormonism emerged from the ashes. Well, the people that spent the most
time around Joe, knew him best on a personal level, which is something
that the later members of the church didn\'t have access to. The more
people Joe got to follow him, the less each new person knew about, or
spent time with him, to the point that he could make his followers
believe almost anything, without them ever questioning him as an equal
human being. Joe built this separation mechanism into the chruch. Now
extrapolate that out 180 plus years, and there you have the key to how
Mormons feel about Joe and their leadership today. That\'s why they
carry such high revere in the church, and when TBMs hear about Joe
getting arrested, they are able to say, \"Well he was just a man like
the rest of us, it has no bearing on him being a prophet of god\". Or
for a more pertinent example, when Mormons hear that Joe was attacked by
multiple mobs, but was somewhat deserving of it because of his actions,
they can rationalize it away by saying, \"If he wasn\'t a true prophet
of god, then why were the people so opposed to him. His persecution
proves that he was a real prophet\". I know that may sound ridiculous,
but that is the mindset that Mormons have about Joe and the type of
person he was. He was somehow separated from all the bad shit he did.
Like when it comes to the golden plates, or anything related to the
church he organized, that\'s the one exception to all his lying and
swindling. It\'s just this one thing that Joe never lied about, because
he was speaking and acting for god when it came to the church.
Reconnecting those two opposing perspectives of Joe, is paramount for a
Mormon that\'s transitioning out of the church. With everything I\'ve
learned about Joe, it\'s given me an all new perspective of the *man*
Joseph Smith. But as I related at the beginning of this rant, I still
have a hard time compartmentalizing the cardboard cut-out Joseph Smith
that I know from my childhood, apart from the actual Joe that reality is
slowly constructing right in front of us. It seems like the believing
Mormon is talking about a completely different Joseph Smith, than the
Joe that we can construct from documented history.

So why was Joe so persecuted, I want to get to the bottom of this? Like
I said earlier, I don\'t know if my previous opinions of Joseph Smith,
are what\'s keeping me from filling in this ever important piece of the
puzzle. The natural explanation at hand seems ample enough to justify
the mob\'s actions, but it just seems like there\'s something more
there. I\'m hoping to get some perspective from the listeners here. I\'m
really working to understand this, as well as articulate it in a way
that fills the void. If anybody has any idea of why Joe was the hated
pariah that\'s become the center of this show, I want to hear it. I want
opinions from ex-Mormons who have to deal with this same dichotomy of
character that I\'m dealing with, and I would also like to get some
Never-Mormons to chime in and offer their perspective, without having to
deal with the burden of suppressing the reported version of the prophet
Joseph Smith, like ex-Mormons have to. Was Joe so hated because he was
the local treasure hunter turned anti-Christ? Or was he an habitual
liar? Or was there something more there that I\'m not seeing? This will
be a recurring question throughout the entire history of the church. I
want to know what drove Lilburn Boggs to sign the Mormon extermination
order, which basically gave free license to anybody to shoot and kill
any Mormon on sight. I want to know why Joe, and the early Mormons, were
chased out of their homes repeatedly. I want to know why hundreds of
people gathered in Carthage to lynch Joe and Hyrum. There was something
about Joe and the early Mormons that really unnerved people, and caused
them to act very harshly toward the Mormons. These social opinions of
Joesph, along with mob mentality, ultimately precipitated Joe\'s death
by the bloodied rifle barrels of the mob.

Speculation on Joe\'s character aside, let\'s talk about the next
segment of what Joe included in his history of the church.

\"For instance, Cyrus McMaster, a Presbyterian of high standing in his
church, was one of the chief instigators of these persecutions; and he
at one time told me personally that he considered me guilty without
judge or jury. The celebrated Dr. Boyington, also a Presbyterian, was
another instigator of these deeds of outrage; whilst a young man named
Benton, of the same religious faith, swore out the first warrant against
me. I could mention many others also, but for brevity\'s sake, will make
these suffice for the present.\"

This was Joe\'s shitlist of the people that were primary persecutors of
the mobs. After a couple hours of furious googling, I couldn\'t find any
mention of these guys that wasn\'t somehow related to a publication by
the church itself, that used this passage specifically to extrapolate
on. I tried and tried to find a journal entry, or minutes from their
congregations that referenced Joe or his church in some way, but the
search just came up dry. Some of the Mormon publications about these
guys are somewhat fascinating, implying some kind of conspiracy among
them and others to persecute Joe, or demonizing whatever religious sect
they were part of, it\'s lots of fun to read what the Mormons have to
say about the people that were beating up their prophet. But, as I dug
in to the names surrounding these guys, it did become somewhat clear. It
seems like McMaster, and Benton were part of the same Presbyterian
congregation the Stowells were members of. Why this is significant, is
the implication of the connection between the 1826 trial, and the two
1830 trials.

Follow me down this rabbit hole for a second. Bossman Josiah Stowell was
one of the few witnesses that came to Joe\'s defense for the 3 trials.
Bossman Josiah Stowell is the center of everything here, keep that in
mind. According to a permit we have on record for some dam building
project in N.Y., Bossman Joe and Cyrus McMaster were business partners
in 1826, and probably knew each other for a long time before and after
that. Well, Cyrus\'s brother was David McMaster, who was one of the
prosecuting witnesses during the 1826 trial. Cyrus was a prosecuting
witness during the 1830 trials. Cyrus was married to a woman named
Electa Bridgeman, who was the sister of Peter Bridgeman. Hopefully that
name rings a bell, but if not, it\'s ok. There\'s a lot of names thrown
around on this show, and this name first popped up 11 episodes ago.
Peter Bridgeman was the person who filed the complaint against Joe in
the first place in 1826, which brought Joe to trial for
\"Glass-looking\" in South Bainbridge N.Y., a crime for which he was
convicted.

Keep with me here for just a minute longer. Next in Joe\'s list of so
called persecutors was \"The celebrated Dr. Boyington\", who was
actually named Nathan Boynton. This guy was also probably a member of
the Presbyterian church that the McMasters attended. Well, Nathan
Boynton was married to Lepha Stowell who was Bossman Joe\'s sister,
making Boynton an in-law of the Stowells.

Next in the list we have Abraham Benton. He\'s the odd man out that
shares no familial ties with the rest of the family web we\'ve just
strung together, with all the previous names. However, Benton did study
medicine under \"The celebrated Dr. Boyington\", and was probably an
assistant, or worked closely with Boynton. Benton doesn\'t come up
anywhere before this point when we\'re talking about the 1830 trial,
which puts the timing as something of an oddity. The reason I say that
is because of Abraham Benton\'s cousin. Harriet Benton, a very short
time before the 1830 trials, married a man named Lyman Wight. This is a
man that\'ll be recurring frequently throughout our examination of
Church history. A month or two after the 1830 trials, Harriet and Lyman
packed up and moved to Ohio, where they were pastored by the one and
only Hingepin Sidney Rigdon. They would become Mormonites very soon
after that.

The reason I say that the timing is something of an oddity, is because
of the connection to the Mormon religion that Abraham Benton had. He
hated Joe and his church, and their frankenstein Book of Mormon, just as
much as the next guy in line, but he had this small family connection to
the church. If there\'s one thing we know about the early church, it\'s
when one person in a family is taken away by the Mormon cult, the rest
of the family turns on the cult and does whatever possible to stop it.
Shit that happens today with people inside all types of religious sects.
I think it has something to do with not wanting the devil to have power
of people\'s loved ones. Well, this was a connection, with a negative
outcome, that Abraham Benton had in relation to Joe\'s church. The
church was in the early stages of stealing away his cousin Harriet
Benton, and forcing her to move around with the Mormons as Lyman
Wight\'s wife. But the problem with the timing is just that. When they
moved to Ohio to be pastored by Hingepin Rigdon, the church hadn\'t
spread out there yet. The church had three official meeting places at
this point, and Mentor, Ohio was not yet one of them. There are people
that claim a significant role by Hingepin Rigdon in the organization of
the early Mormon church, and based off the information presented in a
few episodes of this show, I would be one of those people. There are
people that quote Rigdon with very interesting claims before he
supposedly knew about the BoM. Nothing was said directly, but there are
subtle hints that Rigdon was priming his masses to become Mormonites
well before he was supposed to have read the BoM, and known about the
church. Well, Harriet Benton would have fallen victim to this Joe-Rigdon
conspiracy right in the time frame that we\'re currently examining. If
Harriet was being sucked into the early church, it might serve to
explain why Abraham Benton was so violently opposed to the church, and
why Joe called him one of the three worst persecutors of his early
church, on par with the people who sued him for being a disorderly
person, on three other occassions. Either that, or Benton was just
friends with the other people we\'ve talked about just now, and hated
Joe just to be on their side. I think it\'s a matter of what\'s most
convincing. If Abraham Benton hated the church this much in the 1830\'s,
so much so, that Joe picked him out of a crowd of dozens to star in his
own personal history of the church, then this familial connection serves
as a weak piece of connective evidence for the pre-1830 Rigdon-Joseph
correspondence theory. The connection might not be strong, and it may
require a few steps to get there, but it seems slightly convincing from
what I\'ve been able to find in the research for this episode. This is
just one of a few connections that bolster the pre 1830 Joe-Rigdon
connection that we\'ll be examining today.

Speaking of what\'s most convincing, that\'s what we try to focus on
here. What\'s the most convincing model we can construct of early Mormon
history? Let\'s take a step back and look at the model we\'ve
constructed surrounding these individuals so far. We have Cyrus and
David McMaster, who were persecutors of Joe, and prosecuting witnesses
against him respectfully. Then, we have their in-law connection to Peter
Bridgeman, who was the first guy that filed a lawsuit against Joe, in
1826, on behalf of Bossman Josiah Stowell, of whom Peter Bridgeman was a
relative. Next we have Nathan Boynton, who married into the Stowell
family. He was apparently enough of a persecutor that Joe named him out
of the mob of Mormon haters for what he was doing. And finally, we have
Abraham Benton with a historically weak connection to the early Mormon
church in Ohio, through Hingepin Sidney Rigdon, months before Rigdon
supposedly even knew about the Book of Mormon.

Who is the single person at the center of it all? Well, Joe for one
thing, because if he wasn\'t doing what he was doing, then we wouldn\'t
be talking about this right now, but I\'m more interested in Bossman
Josiah Stowell. He was the one person with connections to every single
person that was listed, that violently despised Joe, and wanted to rip
him out of his place of manufactured power, just like the mob wanted to
rip him out of the constable\'s wagon when the wheel conveniently fell
off in Colesville.

Bossman Josiah Stowell was the only person in this group that had any
sort of favorable attitude towards Joe. He had originally hired Joe for
some treasure seeking. If we remember back to the 1826 trial, Bossman
Joe regaled us with a story of treasure digging with Joseph Smith.
Apparently, in late 1825, Joe looked in precious and Mr. Hat in an
effort to find treasure for his employer. According to Bossman Joe, and
Joe himself, he saw treasure buried with a feather in a certain place.
The Joe duo went digging late at night in the place that Joe had marked
out, and they definitely found something. It was the feather. No
treasure to accompany the feather, probably because the fuckin ground
gnomes had their way with it, but the feather still remained, and they
exhumed it from it\'s burial place. We can look back at that nowadays
and say Joe was obviously pulling a fast one on Bossman Joe. They
reportedly went at night so Bossman Joe couldn\'t tell that the ground
had been previously dug up by Joe, in order to plant the feather. Well,
it was in the wake of this shenanigan that Peter Bridgeman, Bossman
Joe\'s nephew, filed the 1826 complaint against Joe, which brought him
to his first trial that historians are aware of.

Bossman Joe obviously wasn\'t deterred by the findings of this first
trial, even though details he gave in his testimony, helped to render a
guilty verdict against Joe. Bossman Joe came to Joe\'s defense in both
the 1830 trials and became the one testimony that got Joe dismissed on
the bullshit technicality of the statute of limitations, so he still
considered Joe to be legit. What\'s more, Bossman Joe believed in Joe
enough to get baptized into his church in Manchester. It seems like
nothing could rip Bossman Joe away from the cancerous parasite that was,
Joseph Smith. Given the circumstances, I think his fellow Presbyterian
friends were concerned with Bossman Joe\'s wellbeing.

The reason I\'m harping on this so much is to consider the two sides of
the argument that explain the evidence here. It\'ll take a minute to
construct and compare both sides, but I think it\'s pretty revealing
once we hash it all out.

First we have the Mormon perspective of explaining the evidence. They
classify all of it as unfounded religious persecution by a rival Jesus
faction. They would say that the locals felt threatened by the young
prophet, and answered that fear with ostracization and abuse. They would
say that there were only a select few that listened to Joseph Smith, and
followed his teachings, and the rest opposed it so much that, they
couldn\'t help but persecute the prophet, for the wonderful work he was
bringing forth. Most of them would claim that people violently disagreed
with divinely inspired visions of God or Jesus, let alone both, and
wanted to abuse Joseph for claiming such blasphemous things, and this
perfectly explains why all the local religious people were trying to get
him thrown in jail, or just beat him up. And of course, we have the
outlier that saw the truth, Josiah Stowell. He was the only one in the
group that was enlightened enough to see the prophet\'s true divinity,
and therefore stuck with him through thick and thin.

While that may offer some explanatory power, this explanation has a few
holes in it. First, and least importantly, Mormons claim that the first
vision in 1820 with God and Jesus floating above Joseph in the forest,
was a claim that Joe made in the early church and was heavily persecuted
for. Well, as we\'ve covered before, this story didn\'t come out until
1838, long after any of this early persecution that we\'re talking about
was happening. Even worse, the story didn\'t reach it\'s current form
until some time after 1838 which is a huge black mark on the veracity of
what the story claims. The bigger problem with this divinity claim is
the lack of evidence that would be expected, had Joe been claiming the
current telling was the story the whole time. People would have reported
a young Joseph Smith claiming to have seen God and Jesus Christ as two
separate beings, floating above his head in a forest in 1820. Those were
radical claims, that were counter to what most people considered
Christianity. People reported him seeing the angel Moroni in 1823, but
the much bigger claim of God and Jesus as two separate corporeal beings,
dressed in pure white, is something that documented history is
completely silent on. Even the people close to Joe, Ollie Cowdung and
D-Day David Whitmer, considered this 1820 story fabricated, because they
hadn\'t heard of it before the church was organized. Joe just kind of
slipped it into the history to add false legitimacy after the fact. My
point is that people couldn\'t have been persecuting Joe for this one
single radical claim of seeing God and Jesus, because he hadn\'t made it
yet.

Now on to the more important part of the argument against the Mormon
side for explaining the evidence here. I referenced it earlier, but I
need to explain it a little deeper. I think Bossman Joe\'s fellow
Presbyterians and family members were worried about his wellbeing.
Let\'s face it, Joe had swindled Bossman Joe out of wages for treasure
hunting a couple of times in a couple of locations. Joe was clever about
it too, at least he thought he was. Like in the case of Harris Stowell,
Bossman Joe\'s brother. Harris attempted to imperically test Joe by
hiding a bag of grain in his own barn, and asking Joe to find it. Joe
utterly and completely failed, and even asked Bossman Joe to give up the
location of the bag for a couple of quarters. This was a story told
under oath in a court of law. That doesn\'t make it completely accurate,
but it does lend a fair amount of credibility to the claim. Joe had
created a habit of swindling Bossman Joe, and Bossman Joe was a complete
sucker for it all. He bought everything wholesale, hook, line, and
sinker, and Joe was able to work him like an anthropormorphic version of
precious, cuz let\'s face it, that rock had no idea what the fuck was
Joe was doing, kinda like Bossman Joe didn\'t.

There\'s an overall point here. Is it likely that all of Bossman Joe\'s
friends saw what was going on between him and young charlatan Joe, and
wanted to save Josiah from the trappings of this prolific hocus-pocus
hocking huckster? Put yourself in the shoes of Peter Bridgeman, or
Nathan Boynton, or Cyrus McMaster, or any other person that was a close
friend of Bossman Joe. If you saw one of your friends being bled more
and more every day by a parasite like Joseph Smith, wouldn\'t you do
whatever possible to try and save him, whether legal, or extra-legal?
Maybe this is why so many people were pushing against the unstoppable
consuming fire that was Joseph Smith, with such force.

So let\'s compare the two sides of the argument that attempt to explain
the evidence. What is more likely? Was Bossman Josiah Stowell, the only
person that was righteous and enlightened enough to follow the holy
prophet of God, in the latter days, in establishing the earthly kingdom
of God, the one and only Joseph Smith? Meaning every person that was
persecuting Joseph Smith was misinformed or compelled to do so by the
devil. Or, is it more likely that Joe had successfully deceived Bossman
Joe, and every person around Bossman Joe could smell the bullshit, and
were trying to free Bossman Joe from the ravenous clutches of Joe the
ignoramous? Which argument really makes the most sense in explaining the
evidence? I suppose you can probably see through the bias built into the
script in constructing this argument, so I\'ll remove my bias and let
you judge for yourself. Consider my argument with it\'s bias, and then
check out the first link in the show notes. It\'s a link to the
fairmormon blog with the article that I took the Mormon side of this
argument from. For anybody that isn\'t aware by this point, fairmormon
is a volunteer based Mormon apologist website. You can look up pretty
much any topic that challenges Mormon history, and find out an
apologists answer to the facts. I encourage anybody that\'s in the
pursuit of knowlege, beyond what I present, to look at this article and
judge my argument against what\'s argued on the website, and see which
argument holds up to simple logic. Seriously, please look it up. If I
fucked up my logic somehow, let me know.

Joes 2 trials aside, what happened next? Well, it was something pretty
special for a couple of reasons. Joe gave his first revelation that
would eventually be included in the Pricey Pearl of Great Price. In late
June of 1830, Joe revealed the book of Moses. This was in the wake of
the trials, and I honestly think that Joe was trying to restore some
credibility somehow. So, he provided revelation of a new perspective on
the story of Moses. This was interesting, because it isn\'t written in
the format that the bible is written in. Specifically the Pentatuch,
which is the first five books of the old testament, were supposedly
written by Moses, and they use a very unique style. This is presupposing
that Moses was indeed a real person which evidence points to that being
the wrong presumption. Regardless of how the bible was written, Joe had
to bring about the bible 2.0, and write things in a whole new way.
That\'s how you could tell that he was a legitimate prophet of god, he
brought new perspective to the same old shitbags that were Yahweh and
Jehovah. Joe revealed this, as he did with all his revelations, from
God\'s perspective. This was fairly unique at the time. Not many people,
even in the Jesus knob gobbling burned over district, were bold enough
to do some crazy shit like this. Joe was a pioneer when it came to
premium, platinum level, grade A bullshit. I\'ll just read a few verses
from this to get an idea of what the entire thing is like. If anybody
wants to hear the passage in it\'s entirety, check out My Book of Mormon
Podcast Episode 83. This is from the very first chapter in the Book of
Moses.

\"4. And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee
the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without
end, and also my words, for they never cease.

5\. Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my
glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the
flesh on the earth.

6\. And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the
similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be
the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God
beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all.\"

Just a little sidenote here. I find it interesting that Joe revealed
everything from God\'s perspective. I suppose it\'s internally
consistent, Joe being the mouthpiece of God and whatnot. But when you
take a step back, the irony tends to strike quite hard. What I\'m
referring to is the commandment of \"Thou shalt not take the name of the
lord thy god in vain\". This is a commandment that\'s been left up to
interpretation since being recorded as part of the Mosaic law. A lot of
bible scholars would argue that it had something to do with cursing god,
or cursing someone in the name of god. But the more important thing that
makes it ironic in the Mormon religion is how it\'s interpretted by
Mormons. They consider swearing in the name of god to be taking the
Lord\'s name in vain. Phrases like \"Oh my God\" are strictly forbidden
by true blue Mormons. Saying something like that, is the quickest way to
offend a Mormon. Of course, if you expound on it, it just adds to the
degrees of condemnation.

Phrases like \"Jesus H. Titty-fucking Christ\", or \"Holy Mother of
God\", or \"Holy fucking Goddamn dogshit\", or \"God fucking Dammit\",
or \"Goodness gracious god\'s great balls of fuck-you-over fire\" or
anything like that.

The reason I bring this up is to comment on the irony. When you\'re
talking about taking the Lord\'s name in vain, biblically speaking,
it\'s very different from what we consider vaining today. The ancient
Hebrews didn\'t say \"Oh my Yahweh\", that\'s a fairly modern phrase.
What they considered to be taking the Lord\'s name in vain, was claiming
that you\'re speaking for God when you actually aren\'t. That\'s the
reason that this commandment is couched in a list of 3 other
commandments about having no other gods before Yahweh, and the Lord
being a jealous God. This is even reflected in the new testament in Luke
9. Jesus and his desciples are walking, and happen upon a person that\'s
casting out demons in Jesus\' name. John the beloved tries to stop the
guy, because the man is taking Jesus\' name in vain. Then Jesus answers
with the paltitude of \"Do not stop him, for anybody that is not against
us, is for us\". Remember, this was a group of Jews walking around that
were observing the ancient levitical laws, of which the ten commandments
were a part of. That was the sticking point, and why John tried to stop
this guy, he was taking Jesus\' name in vain, by trying to use it to
cast out the demons.

That is what\'s meant by \"taking the Lord\'s name in vain\" in the
biblical perspective. Mormons have it all wrong, and don\'t understand
the biblical perspective. The Mormon understanding is completely missing
the point that the Bible is trying to make with that commandment. That
being said, let\'s talk about Joe\'s revelations. He wasn\'t just acting
in the name of God falsly, he was claiming divine providence by being a
conduit for God. Joe was claiming to literally speak for god. This
isn\'t some hidden thing in the church, the prophet of the church is
often called the mouthpiece of God for this very reason. What could
possibly be considered more \"taking the Lord\'s name in vain\", than
falsly speaking for God, or giving \"so-called\" divine revelation from
the perspective of God? Joseph Smith, the founder of the Mormon religion
is responsible for the largest violation of this commandment since the
prophet Muhammed in my opinion. Many others have claimed that they had a
connection to God, or they had some kind of insight into the mind of
God, but few have ever claimed that they were speaking as God himself.
This is the absolute height of blasphemy, all things considered. None of
the phrases that I said before were anywhere near as offensive as
anything that Joe said. I was just saying words with God at the
beginning, middle or end. Joe was speaking as God himself, or revealing
scripture from the first person perspective of God. Let\'s try to
empathize with God here. What\'s more offensive? I\'ll be using the word
listener here, but just insert your own name here to help illustrate the
point. Listener fucking dammit, or lis-titty-fucking tener? Or is
somebody saying \"Listener spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the
Listener Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of
days or end of years; and is not this endless?\" What is truly more
offensive to you as the God that created these beings? Picture this from
God\'s perspective. You create the heavens, the earth, the universe, the
cosmos, the primordial soup that all life evolved from on Earth, and one
of those pathetic little creatures, puts words in your mouth, or claims
to be speaking as you, from your perspective. In the Judeo-Christian
perspective, what is more offensive? What is actually considered more
blasphemous? I would argue that speaking for God is more offensive than
just swearing using God.

All of this illustrates just how wrong Mormons have it. It tells us just
how much Joe, and the current LDS church, misunderstand the commandment
of taking the lords name in vain, and the bible as a whole. That was
just a small aside about shit that\'s offensive to believing Mormons,
let\'s get back to the timeline.

At this point, people were kind of down on Joe since his two arrests and
trials, wherein he very narrowly escaped conviction. Joe had to do
something that would resurrect just how genuine his divine revelations
were, so he revealed this chapter of Moses, that would later be included
in the Pricey Pearl.

After Joe gave this revelation, He, and Ollie Cowdung Allover made
another attempt to go to Colesville, and baptize the people that said
they would be, and properly organize the church. Until this time, the
Knight\'s and a couple of other people had just been meeting in the
Knight house, and that was considered the Colesville congregation of the
church. Of course, when they got there, they were chased out, and fled
to Harmony, PA. At this point, Joe effectively swore off that
congregation, and just had to dictate his directions by mail, or
messenger, for his own safety. If Joe ever set foot back in Colesville
again, he would either be drug out to the streets and beaten, or just
straight up lynched. So, for some reason, he was a little afraid of the
people of Colesville, and I don\'t really blame him. But, it all stands
to reason. The people felt wronged by what Joe had done, and was doing,
and they had already tried by legal means, to get satisfaction for his
fraudulent practices. Once Joe escaped on the technicalities, the people
would probably demand satisfaction by any means necessary, because the
legal system had failed them.

So, Joe and Ollie go hang out at the Hale in-laws in Harmony, living in
the house that Joe was attempting to purchase from his father in-law
Isaac Hale. It had just ticked into July of 1830, and Joe received a few
more revelations from God about what was going on, and what they were
supposed to do next. I\'ll just read a few excerpts from those
revelations. They comprise the Book of Commandments, chapters 25, 26,
and 27, and there are a few things in here to focus on that set Joe up
for the rest of his life in the church.

\"Behold thou wast called and chosen to write the book of Mormon;

2.  and I have lifted thee up out of thine afflictions, and have
    counseled thee, that thou hast been delivered from all thine
    enenmies, and thou hast been delivered from the powers of Satan, and
    from darkness!
3.  Nevertheless, thou art not excusable in thy transgressions;
    nevertheless go thy way and sin no more.
4.  Magnifiy thine office;\"

The passage we just read was pretty standard procedure when it comes to
Joe\'s revelations. Basically, Joe ascribes their narrow misses in the
past as given to them by God, and then God tells Joe that he\'s not
under any condemnation for his sins, but that he should go forth and sin
no more. This is like the third time we\'ve read those exact words on
this show, and I\'ll just reiterate my argument with a very simple
question. If Joe was indeed the pious young prophet he claimed to be,
why would God need to continually excuse him for his sins, or tell him
over and over again to go forward and sin no more like the woman caught
in adultery by the scribes and Pharisees in John 8? Obviously, Joe
wasn\'t as clean from sin as the current day church seems to report, so
much so, that Joe had to consistently tell everybody that God forgave
him for his transgressions at the beginning of a bunch of his
revelations. We\'re really starting to see the beginning phase of Joe\'s
revelations morphing from problem solving, into self-serving problem
solving. Let\'s continue on a little later in that same chapter. It
seems to reveal a lot about Joe\'s personality.

This is one extremely telling passage when we try to peer through the
text into the window of Joe\'s mind. Basically, he said that his office
and calling are to work in the church, and in this, he shall have
strength. Remember, I keep reiterating this, but remember, this is Joe
speaking as the only living mouthpiece for the almighty God of the
universe. After he said that he would have strength for working for the
church, he says that \"in temporal labors thou shalt not have strength,
for this is not thy calling\".

What a pompous jackass right? Basically he gave revelation from God that
he\'s supposed to work on the church only, and that he wouldn\'t be able
to do temporal labors because they aren\'t his calling. Alright, I get
where he\'s coming from on this. When you take on a project like
starting a church, or creating, editing and producing a podcast on the
history of said church, it\'s a lot easier to focus on that one thing
when you don\'t have a day-job. Joe was able to swear off all physical
labor for money, and tell everybody that his church was to be his one
and only focus. Bravo, really. I mean, the only people around that he
was revealing this to were the Hale\'s, his wife Emma, Ollie Cowdung,
and John Whitmer, but, it was printed as part of the commandments of the
church, given as revelation from Joe, and it would forever be cemented
into the annals of church history. That was one momentus revelation by
Joe, however, the best part comes up in the next part of the passage.
Joe starts aiming the revelation at Ollie, and some of the shit that he
says might just blow your mind. Growing up Mormon, I never knew that
Mormons had some of the powers that Joe is about to list out for Ollie.

\"**10 **And thy brother Oliver shall continue in bearing my name before
the world, and also to the church. And he shall not suppose that he can
say enough in my cause; and lo, I am with him to the end.

** 11 I**n me he shall have glory, and not of himself, whether in
weakness or in strength, whether in bonds or free;

**12 **And at all times, and in all places, he shall open his mouth and
declare my gospel as with the voice of atrump, both day and night. And I
will give unto him strength such as is not known among men.

**13 **Require not miracles, except I shall command you, except casting
out devils, healing the sick, and against poisonous serpents, and
against deadly poisons;\"

That\'s right, the church that Joe created, that uses the Doctrine and
Covenants as it\'s compilation of holy revelations, is a snake handling,
poison drinking death cult. How fucked up is that? I know that the
church is big on healings with priesthood blessing that uses annointing
oil and whatnot, but when has anybody in the LDS church been bit by a
venemous snake, or drank poison, and wasn\'t hurt by it? I fucking love
how this is never talked about in the church. It\'s right in the
Doctrine and Covenants, and it\'s completely, and outrageously stupid.
Like, post thrown monkey shit, sliding down the wall stupid.

So now that Joe gave Ollie super powers that supposedly every true
Christian has, Joe turned his focus to the real world problems of the
precarious situation he just made. What I\'m referring to is that lack
of income to survive off of. Joe wasn\'t bringing in the big bucks like
he thought he would with selling the Book of Mormon. Back then, selling
a couple copies per day would be enough to sustain Joe and Emma, and
possibly even his closest cabinet members in the church. Well, they
weren\'t even able to sell that many, and the investment fund was drying
up. Especially because of Not-So-Smarty-Marty. Of course, he\'d dropped
the 3 grand to publish the book, and he was probably a bit concerned
with getting paid back. He was probably taking half of the profits from
every book sale to try and chew away at the massive debt. If they were
able to sell every one of the 5,000 copies at the \$1.75 that Joe
initially set out, they would be made in the shade with an extra \$5,700
to split up as profit, or reinvestment back into the church. Well,
hardly any books were selling, and Joe was desperate for money to live
on. Emma was probably badgering him to do something about their lack of
money too, I can only imagine how stressed she must have been with the
situation. Well, the last few verses of section 25, and the first few
verses of the following section, help to take care of that little
problem.

\"[]{#anchor}**18**And thou shalt take nopursenor scrip, neither
staves, neither two coats, for the church shall give unto thee in the
very hour what thou needest for food and for raiment, and for shoes and
for money, and for scrip.

[]{#anchor-1}**19**For thou art called toprunemy vineyard with a
mighty pruning, yea, even for the last time; yea, and also all those
whom thou hastordained, and they shall do even according to this
pattern. Amen.

On to section 26

\"Emma, my daughter in Zion, a revelation I give unto you, concerning my
will:

2 Behold thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I
have called. 3 Murmur not because of the things which thou hast not
seen, for they are withheld from thee, and from the world, which is
wisdom in me in a time to come. 4 And the office of thy calling shall be
for a comfort unto my servant Joseph, thy husband, in his afflictions
with consoling words, in the spirit of meekeness. 5 And thou shalt go
with him at the time of his going, and be unto him for a scribe, that I
may send Oliver withersoever I will.\"

Jumping down to verse 8

\"8 And thou needest not fear, for thy husband shall support thee from
the church\"

And from then on, the leadership of the church would be supported by the
church. And somehow, that same doctrine has inflated to Boyd K. Packer
having more than \$1.6 Million in real estate holdings in the Salt Lake
valley before Mormon Satan dragged him back home. I\'m not sure where to
draw the line between a person being supported by the church, or making
money from the church, but I think the current leadership of the LDS
church found that line, and fuckin nuked it a long time ago.

So let\'s talk about what the heart of that revelation was, as opposed
to the small details. Basically, Joe was setting up the leadership as it
best served the him, or the church leadership at that point. Before
these revelations, the primary scribe of the church was Ollie. Well, Joe
needed somebody with church authority, to go to Colesville to baptize
the new comers, and any time he would go there with Ollie, they would
barely escape with their lives. So, Joe decided to alleviate the problem
by not going, and sending Ollie as his proxy.

The problem with sending Ollie away, was the fact that Joe no longer had
his second in command right by his side helping with usual church duties
or being his scribe. So, Joe called Emma to repentance, and gave her the
calling of being the church scribe.

John Whitmer was there in the midst of all this as well. Joe gives him a
very weird revelation. The content itself isn\'t really that weird, but
there\'s a small detail in it that\'s easy to overlook. The revelation
is two verses and reads as follows.

\"1. Behold, I say unto you that you shall let your time be devoted to
the studying of the scriptures, and to preaching, and to confirming the
church at Colesville, and to performing your labors on the land, such as
is required, until after you shall go to the WEST to hold the next
conference; and then it shall be made known what you shall do.

2\. And all things shall be done by common consent in the church, by
much prayer and faith, for all things you shall receive by faith.
Amen.\"

Follow me for a second here, because the detail I want to focus on is
the \'West\' that was revealed in that verse. It was saying that the
next conference would be held in the west, and that would be where John
Whitmer would receive further intructions on his calling in the church.
I find it interesting that Joe would refer to the next place as the
West. When you look at a map of the NY, PA, Ohio area, and put a pin in
Colesville, where Joe was sending Ollie and John, it is the furthest
most East destination that the church would deal with for a little
while. So the connection I\'m about to draw might not have a foundation,
or I might just be reading too deeply into things when focusing on the
phrase of \"To the West\". This is something that\'s in line with the
Solomon Spaulding authorship theory. It has to do with positing the
claim that Sidney Rigdon, and Joseph Smith had been planning for a long
time to convert the congregants of Rigdon\'s Mentor, OH church to
Mormonism, long before it\'s recorded in the church history that
Hingepin Rigdon and Joe met. When Joe says that the next conference
would be held to the West, he could have been implying Ohio. The next
conference was held in Fayette, which is really North of Colesville,
slightly West, but much much more North. Also, Manchester/Palmyra is a
fair amount of distance almost directly West of Fayette, so Fayette
wasn\'t the Westernmost place that Joe was talking about when he said
West. It\'s kind of odd that he told John Whitmer that the next place he
would get instructions for his calling was \"To the West\", as opposed
to North. This is made even more odd by the fact that Joe gave this
revelation when they were all in Harmony, PA, the Westernmost city they
had been in up to this point. If Joe was saying that the next revelation
would come in Fayette, why wouldn\'t he say to the North, or East which
is where all of those towns are in comparison to Harmony, where he was
giving this revelation. He said \"To the West\" when they weren\'t aware
of anything that was going on West of Harmony. But, that\'s only if you
believe what the church\'s recorded history says. If Joe and Hingepin
Rigdon had been planning things long before this, Joe could say this
\"To the West\" line as some sort of prophecy of the Mentor church
joining up with them, and that the next conference would be to the
direct West of all the towns they had been working in since. That could
mean Ohio. Mentor OH, is directly West of Harmony, and it would make
sense that if Joe and Rigdon were finally bringing their plan together,
that Joe would be making subtle elusions to it. But, like I said, I
might just be reading into it too much, and \"To the West\" could just
be implying the secondmost Eastern town, meaning Fayette, they were
working in when Joe said it. There really isn\'t any way of knowing what
Joe meant by \"The West\" for sure, but it\'s still fun to speculate on
small details that seem to bolster the claim that Joe and Rigdon knew
each other, long before the BoM ever went to print.

Alright, specualtion aside, let\'s talk about what happened next with
Joe and friends. Well, they sort of had a\..... rough patch, one could
say. In order to understand this, I\'ll have to introduce all never-mos
to the term priestcraft. This is a word that I thought was a word for a
long time, until I heard David Michael on My BoM Podcast come across it
and not have any idea what it was. I wasn\'t even aware that it was
Mormonese. Well the actual definition of it in the dictionary is
nothing. It\'s not a real word. The two words separated \'priest\' and
\'craft\' next to each other just means the craft or practice that a
priest engages in. However, the Mormonese definition puts it as anybody
that is paid for working for the church. This is 2 Nephi 26: 29 and 31.

\"29. He commandeth that there shall be no priestcrafts; for, behold,
priestcrafts are that men preach and set themelves up for a light unto
the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek
not the welfare of Zion.

\"31. But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor
for money they shall perish.\"

What\'s so weird about this, is if we look at the church today, there
really is no getting around the fact that they have long since overcome
this little hiccup of a revelation, and they pay their full-time clergy
a stipend to live off of. Plus, they have an entire building in SLC, not
just a building, but the tallest skyscraper in SLC that\'s the church
office building, full of people that are \"laboring for Zion\" and they
are all paid a wage for what they do. Beyond that, the church pays their
seminary teachers for teaching high school kids about church during
school hours. Beyond the Seminary teachers, every person in the
leadership of the twelve apostles, and first presidency is paid
stupendous amounts of money for essentially being a full time priest of
the church. The way they amass such ungodly amounts of wealth is by
being a chairman of a specific board of the for-profit arm of the
church, then they\'ll take massive tax-deductable donations for giving a
speach at a school or some kind of conference in various parts of the
world. Basically, there is absolutely no way to skirt this fact, that
there are thousands of people on the church payroll that directly
violate this unambiguous commandment from the BoM. A lot of people would
say that the living stipends they receive aren\'t actually considered
pay, but when you step back and look at it, they are making a living,
and they are working for the church full time. Nothing could be closer
to this definition of priestcraft than what the church does today.

Personally, I don\'t necessarily have a problem with it on a fundamental
level. We all have to have money to live, and if people are devoting a
full time job\'s worth of time to an organization, they should be
compensated for doing so. I only really have a problem when they take
that money that was given to them by tax-free donation basis only, and
they live in their home that they don\'t have to pay property taxes on,
and they deduct their mileage to and from the church, and they work in a
building that\'s on a multi-acre plot, usually in prime real estate,
that property taxes aren\'t collected on, and they can do all of this
without having to be transparent whatsoever with their expenditures,
even though they are supposed to be for the good of the community. And
even saying that, I don\'t take into account the frustration that
they\'re selling an invisible, baseless, testless, materialless product
in the first place, in order to collect all that tax free money. But
when it all boils down to the core, I don\'t have much of a problem with
clergy members receiving a living stipend for their work. They
shouldn\'t get rich from it, but they should be able to survive in the
real world.

Where I draw the line with the LDS church is the fact that
\"priestcraft\" is against their canon and doctrine in multiple places,
and yet they still do it. Even moreso than that, they still somehow
claim to have an unpaid clergy, which is just boldfaced lying when you
boil it down like I did earlier. Hypocrisy, thy name is descipleship.

Well, unfortunately, I have just as much of a problem with the hypocrisy
here as Ollie Cowdung Allover had. Soon after Joe gave his revelations
to Ollie, Emma, and John Whitmer, Ollie left, and made his way to the
Whitmers in Fayette. This marks the first official dissention in the
church, and it was orchestrated by Oliver Cowdery. Ollie was more of a
scholar on the BoM than Joe was, having written it down twice, once
during Joe\'s dictation, and once to create the printers manuscript. He
knew that priestcraft, as Mormons perceive it, was in direct conflict
with the BoM, and Ollie knew that Joe had given faulty revelations
before. One example of some faulty revelations would be in relation to
the trips to Canada to sell the copyright of the BoM. Check out episode
20, for all the details on that.

Well, Joe sent Ollie to Fayette with the revelations we just read that
told Joe to take what he needs to survive from the church, and that Joe
would be able to support Emma through the support of the church. Well,
Ollie really didn\'t like this too much, and considered it a faulty
revelation. This was during mid to late July that this all happened.
Well, Joe received a letter from Ollie that had some real bite to it.
Unfortunately, this letter is no longer extant, but, we can read what
Joe said about it, and what he did to remedy the situation from the
history of the church vol 1.

\"Cowdery\'s Error.

Whilst thus employed in the work appointed me by my Heavenly Father, I
received a letter from Oliver Cowdery, the contents of which gave me
both sorrow and uneasiness. Not having that letter now in my possession,
I cannot of course give it here in full, but merely an extract of the
most prominent parts, which I can yet, and expect long to, remember.

He wrote to inform me that he had discovered an error in one of the
commandments---Book of Doctrine and Covenants: \"And truly manifest by
their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto a
remission of their sins.\"

The above quotation, he said, was erroneous, and added: \"I command you
in the name of God to erase those words, that no priestcraft be amongst
us!\"

I immediately wrote to him in reply, in which I asked him by what
authority he took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or
diminish from, a revelation or commandment from Almighty God.\"

Alright, so what happened here, and why does it matter? Joe had given
the revelation that he, and Emma, would be supported by the church, and
Ollie knew it was in direct conflict with the Book of Mormon, and what
the church had been teaching up to that point. Then Ollie Cowdung threw
some bullshit at the shituation and commanded Joe in the name of God to
change the revelation to comport with the teachings of the church up to
this point. Joe fired back a letter asking Ollie who the fuck he thinks
he is, stating that Joe was the one guy responsible for the revelations
from god, and anything that comes from Joe is obviously the only real
word of God. Last episode I described one reason why I like Ol\' Orrin
Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell much more than Ollie Cowdung Allover.
It\'s because Ol\' Port actually had a spine, and Joe couldn\'t control
Ol\' Port like he could Ollie. This is a perfect example of Joe giving
revelation to trump Ollie\'s revelation, just to break Ollie\'s spirit,
and force him to submit to Joe\'s will.

I think it\'s a bit apparent to see that Joe was a little threatened by
Ollie at this point. Well, it\'s not too hard to imagine. Ollie had been
with Joe since the beginning basically, and he saw through the false
prophet facade that Joe was constructing for his followers to worship. I
mean, the first revelation that was read to the April 11^th^
congregation of the church, was actually given by Ollie. That\'s right,
the sermon that Ollie gave, started off with preaching from Ezekial 14,
and then read, not Joe\'s, but Ollie\'s revelation concerning the
organization of the church. That\'s found in present day D&C 20. I think
at this point, Ollie didn\'t necessarily see Joe as his superior. I
think there may have been a bit of infighting between them. That could
help to explain all the revelations that Joe gave telling Ollie to
beware of pride, and repent for your pride and wickedness. Joe was
trying to set himself above Ollie, and Ollie wouldn\'t have it,
especially once he discovered a clear and blatant discrepancy in the
doctrine, like he did with the whole priestcrafting thing we talked
about earlier. You almost wonder if Ollie might have thought that he
would be a better person to run the show than Joe was. That\'s made
abundantly clear in 1838 when he\'s excommunicated and goes off to form
the Community of Christ, but you do tend to wonder if he was having
those same thoughts 8 years before he left. That\'s what I like to think
about. It\'s all about the human element. If we try and look at these
historical events without the human element in place, things don\'t
always tend to make sense. But, when we consider the possibility that
Ollie was competing for top dog because he thought he would be a better
prophet than Joe, a lot of interesting variables get added in. And
honestly, before this point, Joe hadn\'t done anything that explicitly
smacked down Ollie for his subversion of Joe\'s authority. Like I said
earlier, Joe had told Ollie to beware of pride, or repent, but never
before had he been so direct. At times, Joe had nurtured Ollie\'s
attempts to be a prophet. Ollie tried \"translating\" some of the
plates, which translation is no longer extant. Ollie was the first
preacher of the church, and gave the first sermons. Ollie\'s revelation
was the first revelation read to people in the first two congregations
of the church, and we owe most of the current organization of the male
roles in the church to Ollie\'s revelation of the power structure. Joe
had Ollie do all the baptisms and confirmations up to this point. Are we
starting to see why Ollie might have thought he was in charge, as
opposed to just following Joe blindly like he\'s portrayed in current
Mormon history?

Before moving on to Joe\'s solution of Ollie\'s subversive reaction to
Joe\'s revelations, we need to talk about the last line that was just
read out of the history of the church. I have a bit of a problem with
it, and I would hope that it\'s quite clear why, without me having to
make much of a case for it. When Ollie had written this scathing letter
to Joe, Joe\'s reply letter had the line \"by what authority he
\[Ollie\] took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or
diminish from, a revelation or commandment from the Almighty God\". What
the fuck is this? I know for a fact that the church claims anything the
current prophet reveals, supercedes anything in the past, but that just
means that church doctrine is kind of like the U.S. constitution.
Ammendments can be added to the bill of rights, even to the point that
one ammendment can override others, however, the ammendments can\'t be
changed willy nilly, nor can the constitution itself. However, in this
example, Joe is offended that he gave revelation from \"the Almighty
God\", and Ollie was demanding that Joe change it to be in accordance
with what the church really believes. How many times do I have to
reiterate the millions of changes in the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and
Covenants collectively that the church has quietly performed to make
them more concordant with reality? The church changes the wording in the
BoM every few years like clockwork. The most current revision was
published in 2013, but they told Mormons not to worry, because it
didn\'t change anything fundamentally, nor did the page numbers change
at all. In researching the differences between the 1833 book of
commandments, as opposed to the current version of the Doctrine and
Covenants that\'s posted on the LDS.org website, there really is no
place to start. Entire sections are massively altered, wording is
bastardized, sections are made longer or shorter, or given more or less
verses depending on what fits best, the differences are probably
innumerable. What the fuck would Joe possibly think, if he were to read
the current publication of the church canon, as opposed to what he
revealed and recorded. Given how angry Joe was at Ollie\'s God commanded
threat, one could probably shut down every coal-fire power plant in
America today, if we were somehow able to harness the power of Joe
perpetually turning over in his grave for what today\'s church has done
to his original revelations.

And think of yourself in Joe\'s position. If you had given divine
revelation from the Almighty God, would you allow people to change it
here and there, just to best suit their endgame? NO! It would piss you
off, and you would do something about it, much like Joe did in this
situation. Let\'s finish out this episode by reading Joe\'s recorded
response to this chiding letter from Ollie.

Back to History of the Church vol. 1.

\"The Prophet\'s Correction of the Error.

A few days afterwards I visited him and Mr. Whitmer\'s family, when I
found the family in general of his opinion concerning the words above
quoted, and it was not without both labor and perseverance that I could
prevail with any of them to reason calmly on the subject. However,
Christian Whitmer at length became convinced that the sentence was
reasonable, and according to Scripture; and finally, with his
assistance, I succeeded in bringing, not only the Whitmer family, but
also Oliver Cowdery to acknowledge that they had been in error, and that
the sentence in dispute was in accordance with the rest of the
commandment. And thus was this error rooted out, which having its rise
in presumption and rash judgment, was the more particularly calculated
(when once fairly understood) to teach each and all of us the necessity
of humility and meekness before the Lord, that He might teach us of His
ways, that we might walk in His paths, and live by every word that
proceedeth forth from His mouth.\"

What a pompous douchbag, right? Ollie was expressing dissent, or some
kind of disagreement with Joe\'s revelation. So, Joe made a trip from
Harmony, up to Fayette, a journey of almost 300 miles, in order to
correct the disagreement, or squash the insurrection, whichever
perspective you prefer is probably accurate. And to be honest, rightly
so. If Joe would have just ignored the problem, Ollie and the Whitmer
family would have fallen away right at that moment, as opposed to doing
so on Defection Day, 8 years later. When Joe got to the Whitmer home, he
found that everybody agreed with Ollie, and they all considered Joe a
false prophet by this point.

I\'m not sure if I\'ve made this point before, but I think Ollie was
fairly eloquent in his ability to argue with people, or present his
case. I mean, we know that he was one of the smarter of the group,
probably not as cunning as Joe, but at least as smart, and had
definitely read much more than Joe had. Well, we don\'t know exactly
what was said, or what the mood was among Ollie and the Whitmers, from
when Ollie sent the letter, until Joe got there in person to defend
himself. But, I would be willing to place my bets on the scenario that
Ollie had established himself as the true leader of the church, given
everything leading up to this point, and this discrepancy in doctrine
that he found. I bet that he was telling the Whitmers that if Joe was
coming up with contradictory revelations, or revelations that weren\'t
coming true, he couldn\'t be trusted as the leader anymore. Beside, most
of the Whitmers had seen the revelations Joe gave with instructions to
sell the copyright in Canada that, of course, failed miserably. So in
their minds, Joe was batting a pretty low average at this point. If
Ollie was able to take his revelation of the organization of the church,
and couple that with the BoM, those things alone would be able to
establish him as the leader of the church, and could push Joe into
obscurity because of his own lying.

Well, this is just speculation of what was said, but I don\'t think
it\'s unfounded. I mean, the Whitmers had given themselves to the Mormon
religion, and had accepted the BoM as the new NEW testament of Jesus
Christ in \'Merica. Would it be easier for them to just swear the whole
thing off when contradictions came up, or would it be more likely that
they would simply follow the next person in line that says they have the
truth, that\'s only slightly different from what they had accepted as
truth so far? Just by reading into the human element of what Joe said in
his recounting of the situation, I think we can come to an understanding
that the Whitmers were ready to follow the new prophet and president of
the church Ollie Cowdung Allover Cowdery, and leave Joe to do his own
thing, with his own church.

Well, Joe wouldn\'t let this subversion orchestrated by Ollie do him in,
at least, not without a proper theologically combative argument. Joe
tells this with the line \"When I found the family in general of his
\[Ollie\'s\] opinion concerning the words above quoted, and it was not
without both labor and perseverance that I could prevail with any of
them to reason calmly on the subject.\"

Basically, Joe tried to convince everybody that he was too for real, and
they would just argue with him about it. Ollie had done some serious
work on these people, if they all opposed Joe to the point that they
wouldn\'t be easily coaxed back to the Joe side of early Mormonism. Like
I said, it\'s all about the human element buried in the history. Ollie
was a convincing debater, and he was able to convince people to easily
side with him. Why else would Joe send Ollie on all the most important
missions? He tasked Ollie with convincing, or baptizing some of the
higher value targets, that would later become big movers in the church.
Joe revered Ollie when they were on the same side. However, when Ollie
and Joe did occassionally lock horns, they were each other\'s greatest
foes.

The only way that Joe was able to prevail in this situation, was by
going after the weakest one in the herd, Christian Whitmer. He was the
eldest sibling of all the Whitmers, born in 1798, but for some reason,
he was the crack in the foundation of the wall that Ollie had
constructed to keep Joe out. But, Joe, being as adaptive as water to a
weak foundation, was able to slip in, and chip away at that foundation,
until it all crumbled, and the Whimer family, and Ollie were all
convinced of Joe\'s claims of being a prophet once again. Joe was
somehow able to reconcile the blatant contradiction between the BoM and
the revelation he had just given concerning priestcraft, and everybody
bought it, and lived happily ever after\...\... For a little while
anyway\.... At least, they did until Hiram Page tried to give his own
revelation using his own seer stone in his own hat. That was the next
fire that Joe had to put out, and it\'s the story we\'ll open up the
next historical episode with. But for now, we can see how intelligent
and adaptive Joe was by inserting the human element into the few
paragraphs of the History of the Church that we read today.

In simple conversations, I\'ve been asked before \"If you could have one
conversation with somebody from antiquity, who would it be?\". That\'s
always a hard one, and the answer tends to differ with whatever it is
I\'m studying at the time. I\'ve often answered with some amazing
warlord like Alexander the Great, or Adolf Hitler. Other times, I would
like to meet an intellectual hermit like Archemedes or Nikola Tesla. I
suppose the answer isn\'t set in stone, because it\'s all hypothetical
anyway. So, today I can honestly answer that question invariably with
the name Oliver Cowdery. Cowdery was a person that was like no other. He
was one of the closest people to the prophet for the most formative
years of the church. He was responsible for some of the biggest
insurrections throughout the entirety of church history. And, to top it
all off, the RLDS church today, has him to thank for defecting when he
did, and not allowing himself to join in on the child-fucking ring of
polygamy, that later became the Nauvoo, and SLC LDS churches. Oliver
Cowdery was a smart guy, and I think he knew what he wanted in life. He
was a crusader for truth, no matter how delusional the truth he was
studying. He didn\'t have a problem standing up to Joe in some
situations, and had the intellect sharp enough to defend his actions and
beliefs. If I could go back and have a conversation with anybody from
the early Mormon church, aside from the prophet of course, I would
instantly chooe Oliver Cowdery, just to find out what kind of a person
he really was. But, until Google puts the final touches on time travel,
I suppose I\'ll just have to get by with speculation on this dynamic,
and exciting individual, based on whatever we can read about him. I\'m
really excited to see what happens in the near future with our buddy
Elder Oliver Cowdery, Ollie Cowdung Allover.

There are a couple of new Patrons to thank.

Juvenile Dilinquints: Roger, Marc

Adolescent Rebels: Jeff Peterson

Demons: Greg, Frank, and Shelley (Frank obstaining from story)

Greg and Shelley are two of the best friends that anybody could ever
have. They\'ve known each other for quite some time, and have hung with
each other through thick and thin. Nothing has ever been unattainable
for them as a team. Competitive sports are a breeze, to the point that
they\'re always trying new things to stimulate their collective adrenal
gland. Not only are they inseparable as friends, but they share
everything with each other. No topic is too deep for them to have a
discussion about, no matter what the circumstances are.

Well, today is no different for Shelley and Greg. It\'s just business as
usual as they\'re gearing up for the rally car race they are about to be
in. While they are putting on their flame-retardant jump suits, and
fitting their helmets, Greg and Shelley are in the middle of some very
interesting conversations. They\'re talking about a subject they\'ve
rarely talked about with each other before today. They\'re trying to
suss out the meaning of life and mortality. They had been going through
life without having contemplated their own existence, or even discussing
it with each other, but today is different somehow. They\'re really
debating where humans come from, and what the ultimate end-game for the
human race is, but like everybody whose had this discussion before them,
they keep coming up with meaningless profundities, that don\'t really
help to answer the real question of existence or offer any kind of
solace for these deep philosophical thoughts. Their conversations divert
from these deep philosophical conundrums, to strategies for the race,
and back again, almost like life and this race are analogous to each
other somehow.

This isn\'t the first race they\'ve been in together, but rather, one
race of many in the tournament they had entered 3 weeks ago. But,
today\'s race is a big one for them. They\'ve been waiting for this for
a long time, because this is the most challenging of all the courses
they\'ve so far encountered. There are a few reasons this track is so
viciously treacherous, but the main reason is for curve 13, known as the
widowmaker curve. This curve has claimed so many racers that lawsuits
are pushing the rally organization to put railing up to reduce the
number of cars going off the edge. So far, they hadn\'t budged.

Shelley, being a world class rally driver, gets behind the wheel, with
Greg as the worlds premier rally course navigator/co-pilot. Unknown to
the team before the race started, it would be held as a close quarters 4
car per section race. That meant that 4 cars would race together right
next to each other, instead of the rally race being an individual time
trial like usual. This was a completely unexpected decision by the
organizing staff, but what can ya say, they wanted to boost viewer
ratings by making things a little more dangerous and intense, so let it
be said, and let it be done.

The four couples of racers are lined up staggered 2 by 2, waiting for
the flag to drop initiating the race. Shelley raps up the engine of her
state of the art number 24 rally car, and looks over at her co-pilot
Greg. They each give a silent nod to each other, their universal symbol
of \"let\'s do this\". The other three drivers rap up their engines, and
all four cars hum in a chorus of straightpiped, high-performance glory.
The flag drops and the racers are off in a blur of rally colors and
paddle-shifting blips of the finely tuned engines. Greg is barking
commands with perfect timing, and Shelley is executing every turn and
elevation change with a certain grace and comfort achieved by only the
best of drivers. Shelley and Greg are burning down this mountain. Turn
5, 6, and 7 all fly by without the least bit of trouble. The 2 racers
that started in the back of the race, are struggling to keep up and
eventually fall out of sight, however, car number 7 that started right
next to Shelley and Greg had jumped ahead by getting a slightly better
start off the line, and they won\'t budge from first place.

Both cars fly through turns 9 and 10, with our heros in number 24 right
on the tail of the 7 car. They round corner 11, and Shelley sees the
opening on the inside of the corner, that she had been hoping for the
whole time. She grabs a gear, and slips through the opening, and locks
up first place, just in time to round corner 12, and smash the downhill
straight leading to the widowmaker. It\'s a mere third of a mile
straight before the near 90 degree widowmaker bears it\'s flesh
devouring fangs, and Shelley knows that this is the most important
corner of her life to make successfully. Greg looks over at her, and
whispers encouragement, \"You got this\". They silently nod at each
other, and Shelley shoves the accelerator into the firewall.

The corner is getting closer, and can just barely be seen at the edge of
Greg and Shelley\'s depth perception. Just as they are both silently
focused on the corner they are about to encounter and own like
champions, an all call over the radio barks, \"Mayday Mayday! Car number
7 has lost brakes and is out of control!\" Greg casts a glance in the
rear view mirror where he can see the driver and co-pilot in 7 losing
their usual composure, as they come to a realization that the widowmaker
lies ahead as the next corner. Shelley glances in her mirror and sees 7
slowly dropping back. They were both flying down the hill, and Shelley
knew that she barely had time to slow herself down before the
widowmaker. Number 7\'s driver downshifted to try and use the engine to
brake enough for the corner. These rally car engines are made to never
die, but Shelley could hear 7\'s motor screaming in agony, way above
redline under the weight of the car bolting down the straight toward
certain destruction at the hands of widowmaker.

Shelley\'s eyes dart from the road in front of her, with the approaching
deadly corner that leads to a sudden 600 foot drop, to her mirror as she
watches 7 arduously slowing despite their built up speed, and downhill
trajectory. She looks at Greg, and Greg looks back at her. Greg says,
\"Do you think they\'ll be alright?\" Just as the words left his mouth,
there\'s a loud pop from 7 and smoke started to billow out of every seam
of the engine compartment. The motor had given in to the forces of
nature, and the rpm\'s from 7 had blown a piston head through the block,
and fired it like a titanium rocket through the carbon fiber hood. The
engine was destroyed, and nothing was helping to slow 7 down for the
impending corner. Greg knew what had happened as soon as he heard the
sound.

Greg and Shelley look at each other, internally assessing the situation.
\"You know what we have to do\", Greg said. They silently nodded at each
other. Shelley dumped the accelerator pedal, dropped 2 gears and eased
on the brakes a moment before necessary to safely negotiate widowmaker.
She no longer has the corner in mind, but rather, a plan. She was going
to do something she had done to plenty of racers before while overtaking
them in a corner.

It\'s a very simple procedure, and racers sometimes call it
back-boarding, a term lifted from basketball. When she had used this to
her advantage in the past, she would accelerate hard before a corner and
gain the inside of the corner on the person she was trying to pass.
Then, she would slide into that car that was on the outside of the
corner, trading paint, and giving her extra speed to that car, and using
them to slow herself down enough to make the corner. She would do this,
and then pass the car she had just fucked over, that would end up
sliding into the grass on the outside of the corner. But this time, she
would make her car, 24, the backboard and soak up the extra speed from
7, hopefully forcing them to negotiate widowmaker at a safe speed.

A second after this thought occured to Shelley, it was time to put the
plan into place. Greg has his eye on 7 in the mirrors, and Shelley has
her eye on their own place on the track. She slows 24 down enough to get
right next to 7, but both cars are going much too fast to make the
corner. She nudges 24 into the side of 7, just as they get to the
entrance of the corner. Greg and Shelley look at each other and smile,
the plan is in the first stage of working. Shelley cranks the wheel hard
to the right, and 7 follows suit. Shelley hammers down on the brakes and
drops two more gears. 24\'s engine screams from the struggle of slowing
two cars weight. 7 stays on the inside of the corner, and hugs the wall
with the help of 24 on the outside of the corner, but the momentum from
both cars is simply too much for 24 to handle. Just as Shelley and Greg
enter the apex of the corner, 24\'s tires break loose, and all traction
and control is lost at the worst possible time. 24 soaks up the extra
speed, and 7 makes the corner at a safe speed.

The cars part ways as 7 remains under control, but Shelley and Greg in
24 lose any semblence of control they had before. The car\'s tires are
completely locked up, and the two best friends are aimed straight at
widowmaker\'s ledge, without any way of stopping, or turning to remedy
the situation. Greg looks over at Shelley. They both know that their
time has come, and they would soon be just another statistic, falling
victim to the almighty widowmaker. The car launches off the cliff with
certain death below. Shelley and Greg\'s eyes meet, just as gravity
started to gain control over the car, and lose control over their human
forms inside the car. No verbal communications are necessary. Greg grabs
Shelley\'s hand, and says the simple phrase \"It\'s okay, we did it\".
Time slows to a near halt just as both of them come to a new level of
understanding. What they had just done, was the meaning of being human.

They were both able, and willing to sacrifice their lives to let others
live. This was the most humanist action they could ever possibly
perform. They had reached the height of humanity by saving other
people\'s lives, and that was truly something special. They both
understood just how amazing life is, as their car plunges toward the
ground at an unquestionably deadly speed. This is the end, and they both
know and accept it. The car is aimed straight at the ground, and the
ground is getting closer and closer with each passing second they remain
with hands clenched together. Just as the front of the car touches the
ground, JMS intervenes. JMS has seen the sacrifice that Shelley and Greg
made, and he is very pleased with what he witnessed. He places their
talisman inside the car, just in front of their clenched hands, and
disappears until next he\'s needed.

Greg and Shelley see the glowing translation talisman in front of them,
and reach their clenched hands out to touch the curiosity, and there\'s
nothing but silence.

Back on the mountain, 7 had come to a complete stop on the uphill just
after widowmaker, and it\'s driver and co-pilot had run to the edge of
widowmaker to watch the fate of Shelley and Greg. The car hits the
ground and explodes into a massive fireball, ensuring anybody inside
would be multiple times dead from the impact, or fire. But, no bodies
would be recovered from 24\'s wreck that day. Greg and Shelley have
moved on to bigger and better things.

Thank you both for your support, and welcome as the newest Demons in the
NaMo Outer Darkness Kingdom. Your support goes a long way to perpetuate
the show, and help with production costs.

I also needed to thank Frank. He\'s also a new member of the Demonhood,
but he sent a message saying he didn\'t need anything from it, and just
wanted to support the show. So, to Shelley, Greg, and Frank, thank you
all very much for what you\'re doing to help the show, it really means a
lot.
