---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 18 - Witnesses? Or Swindlers Syndicate?
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-18-witnesses-swindlers-syndicate/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/episode-18-witnesses-or-swindlers-syndicate
category: History
date: 2015-06-04 23:55:49 +0000
---

Episode 18 – Witnesses? Or Swindlers Syndicate?

On this episode, we focus strictly on the testimonies of the 3
witnesses, and the 8 witnesses. Should we take them at face value and
consider them unimpeachable, or is it worth taking a closer look? The
quotes seem pretty open and shut at first glance, but let's really dive
in to see what lurks under the surface, and discover the naked truth.

Website nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music used with permission

Links:

John H. Gilbert recollections:
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/JHGilbert.html>

Dan Vogel, witnesses of the plates:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v-jNV6jN-VQ>

History of the Church 1:54:
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/hc/hcpgs/hc.aspx>

Welcome to Episode 18 of the Naked Mormonism podcast, I'm Bryce
Blankenagel and thank you for joining me.

Last episode covered a lot of information about the plates, and the
authorship of the BoM. We started out talking about the newlyweds,
Joseph and Emma Hale Smith. They went through a lot of transitions
throughout 1827-1829 which was the timeframe we focused on for most of
the episode. The main quote that advanced us through the sequence of
events was the affidavit of Isaac Hale, Joe's father in law. 

We could tell from the content of the quote that Isaac really didn't
like Joe, and was pretty distraught about Joe stealing away, and
marrying his daughter. Put yourself in Isaac's shoes for a minute. In
1825, this dirty little punkass young man Joseph Smith, dressed in rags,
comes to live with you for a few months while working for Bossman Josiah
Stowell. He wasn't there to help farm, or work in a coopers shop or
something productive, he was just there to stare at a rock in a fuckin
hat, and tell a large group of men where to dig to find buried treasure.
You watch as Joe and the gang come up empty handed at the end of every
digging day, and watch the whole group swindle Bossman Joe out of living
expenses and wages, while still never finding anything valuable buried
in the ground. Not only that, but the men gave You a note for boarding
at your house for $12, which "Has yet to be repaid", quoted 9 years
after the incident. How would you feel if you were Isaac in this
situation?

Well, this experience probably left a pretty bad taste in his mouth for
Joe and his treasure digging buddies, but Joe wasn't satisfied with just
leaving Isaac's beautiful daughter alone. Joe frequented back and forth
from Palmyra to Harmony to court Emma. This eventually led to one
crowning moment that besmirched Joe's name forever throughout the entire
Hale family. While the family was away at church one sunday in the
summer of 1827, Joe picked up Emma, who was alone at the Hale house, and
they eloped in Bainbridge N.Y.

Isaac would forever despise Joe throughout the rest of their
relationship, but this wasn't the only reason why. Joe took Emma and
made her live in rags, in the already overcrowded, and under-resourced,
Smith home, then told Isaac that he wouldn't be looking at Precious in
Mr. Hat to find treasure anymore, and that it was all "Damned nonsense",
according to Alva Hale, Emma's brother. Then Joe pretended to have the
plates, and when he and Emma moved in to the Hale household, he showed
Isaac the box that the plates were supposedly in, then continued to
repeatedly lie so that Isaac could never actually look at the plates
that were in the box. Then, when Isaac told Joe that he couldn't have
anything in the Hale house that Isaac, himself, couldn't examine, Joe
supposedly hid the plates in the woods, and translated from them while
they were outside, and he was inside. 

Isaac got fed up with the shenanigans, and kicked Joe and Emma out. But
not all the way out, just out of the Hale house. Joe agreed to a $250
mortgage note to be paid to Isaac for Jesse Hale's house, which was on
one corner of the Hale property. Joe told Isaac he would repay the debt
by working hard, which would have been the most reasonable way to pay
off the note.

Joe gave up on his promise of working hard for a living, and continued
to work on the plates with NSSM as the first scribe, and a few
subsequent scribes after that. Isaac was sick of dealing with Joe's shit
and cut him and Emma off from any kind of assistance. I'm guessing there
were a few conversations in there about Joe and Emma making adult
decisions, like eloping, therefore they needed to act like adults and
support themselves.

As life got busier for Joe, what with Marty losing the 116 pages, and
having a deformed kid that died a few hours after childbirth, Joe joined
the United Methodist church in mid 1828, and halted the translation of
the BoM. Fast forward to April 5<sup>th</sup> 1829, and here enters
Oliver Cowdery, or Ollie Cowdung, as we know him. Ollie and Joe
translate the plates until their money and supplies dry up. Along came
D-Day David Whitmer around June 1<sup>st</sup>, to move Joe, Emma,
Ollie, and Joe's little brother Samuel Smith, to Fayette N.Y., where the
authorship of the BoM would be completed. 

We finished up last episode talking about the order in which the Book of
Mormon was authored, as well as the historical probability of the
existence of the plates that comprised the content of the BoM.
Basically, there isn't a single thing in any field of research that
lends any level of credibility to anything about the entire ancient
sectarian metal plate in the Americas story. It almost seems like we can
destroy Joe's claims without even opening the BoM, but there's a problem
with writing it off so flippantly. There exists contemporary witness
testimony of the authenticity of the Gold Plates. If anybody listening
isn't familiar with the BoM, you may not know exactly what I'm talking
about here.

Well, let's start in on the topic of this episode, the 11 witnesses. Joe
couldn't just make wild claims like that of the existence of the Gold
Plates, without having some people back up what was in his possesion.
Remember, according to Joe, the Angel Moroni regained possesion of the
plates, and translators (Urim and Thummim) before the BoM went to print,
so Joe wasn't able to put the plates on exhibit along with the BoM for
people to see, in order to authenticate the ancient origin of his work.
The best thing Joe could do to vindicate his story to the skeptics of
the world, was have a bunch of people examine the plates, and publish
their testimonies at the end of the BoM.

For a unique perspective of reading these testimonies, listen to the
first episode of David Michael's My BoM podcast, because he reads it
from the perspective of complete ignorance, and tells what he thinks
about the testimonies. If that doesn't tickle your fancy, don't worry,
because we're going to read them in their entirety, and deconstruct them
in the usual Naked Mormonism way. 

There are so many ways to go with this. Normally when I'm researching
for an episode, I start with one point, and follow each tangent, and try
to bring it all together by the end of the episode. But this research
has been like pushing a shopping cart full of puppies through a bacon
factory... The tangents and possibile solutions go off in tons of
directions, and it's hard to wrangle them into one cogent point. So
we're going to start off by just reading the testimonies, and go from
there. The testimonies of the 11 are broken up into the 3 witnesses and
the 8 witnesses. Let's start with the testimony of the 8 witnesses, as
it's less important and will probably take less time than the 3
witnesses. 

I'll read it straight through from the current print of the BoM, and
then deconstruct it line by line after that.

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom
this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this
work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have
the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has
translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings
thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious
workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the
said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a
surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken.
And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that
which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

Christian Whitmer

Jacob Whitmer

Peter Whitmer, Jun.

John Whitmer

Hiram Page

Joseph Smith, Sen.

Hyrum Smith

Samuel H. Smith"

So, let me start off by qualifying the witnesses. This raises our first
problem, and set of questions. You see, when a scientific work is going
under review for validation, and correctness, it has to be seen,
comprehended, and reproduced by hundreds of peers, before it is
considered a scientific fact, or can be called the most likely
explanation. Well, historical and ancient artifact research is much the
same way. 

Let me bring in a current example to shed some light on this. I was just
reading a headline that was a total clickable. It was a link to an
article talking about a piece of Mark that was found in the paper used
for an ancient Egyptian mask in a sarcophogus. Apparently there are
archeaologists that have found these ancient masks made out of,
basically, ancient paper mache, and they are using a method to dissolve
the resin, without destroying the text on the paper that was used to
construct the mask. Well, one of the fragments obtained is supposedly a
piece of the gospel of Mark, and somebody working on it, dated the
fragment to 80 C.E. This may seem like, "what's the big fuckin deal
bro?", but it's fascinating because it's very unique. The earliest
gospel manuscript we have is estimated to be from about 125 C.E., and
it's from an unknown gospel. This manuscript is called P. 52, and it's
about the size of a credit card. One random guy that was working on the
mask, obviously qualified to do so, dated this piece from the mask to 80
C.E., and was able to determine that it was from the gospel of Mark,
which would fall into line with current scholarship that believes Mark
to be the earliest gospel written. The headline said, "shocking victory
for biblical scholars as new archeaological evidence has atheists up in
arms". After reading the article, I'm not really sure why I'm supposed
to be up in arms, because it falls perfectly in line with when secular,
and christian, bible scholars believe the gospel of Mark to have been
written. Now that the discovery has been made, the fragment will be
examined by hundreds of scholars and ancient artifact researchers, to
determine if it is legitimately the first fragment of any gospel we have
from the first century. If it is, and can be authenticated as such, it
will truly be a one-of-a-kind discovery, and will be extremely
fascinating. Hundreds of books will be written by the scholars that
examine the fragment, all relating to the implications of this
discovery. But, it takes review, and consensus from hundreds of people
in related fields to verify it's authenticity. 

The whole reason I brought this up, was to juxtapose it to the quality
of the 8 witnesses. Let's review who these witnesses were, and what else
they wrote about their chance to examine the plates. The first 4
witnesses are Christian, Jacob, John, and Peter Whitmer Jr. Hopefully
the last name rings a bell there. These guys were 4 brothers of D-Day
David Whitmer. They were all living together for the last half of the
authorship of the BoM in the Whitmer residence in Fayette N.Y. They
helped with the translation, and later on became some of the first
missionaries that Joe ever called in service of the church. Then, we
have Hiram Page, the only person in this list without the last name of
Whitmer or Smith. We know very little about Hiram Page, only that he was
born in Vermont, and became a member of the church. We don't even know
what city. But, this serves to explain the connection between D-Day
David, Ollie Cowdung, and Joe Smith. Ollie was the person who baptized
Hiram Page, in 1830, once the church was started, meaning Ollie was
probably the person in the group that was closest to Page. Being that
both Ollie, and Page were born in Vermont, and other connections, we can
only assume they were acquainted with each other, and probably friends.
Well, Page also married Catherine Whitmer in late 1825. This is probably
how Ollie met the Whitmer family, they were his buddie's in-laws. The
relationship Ollie and Page had is the vital bridging piece for Joe
meeting the Whitmer family, and coming to live with them to finish up
writing the BoM. 

The only other place that the name Hiram Page has come up was when we
talked about him revealing the location of Zion with his black seer
stone when Joe was slacking off in the revelation department, in 1831. A
lot of people in the church wanted to know where Zion was going to be
and Joe couldn't tell them, so Page revealed it for himself. Of course,
Joe didn't like this blatantly subversive action and ordered Page's
black seer stone crushed into dust, and the revelation destroyed. 

The next three witnesses are Joseph Smith Sr. (Big Daddy Cheese), Hyrum
Smith, Joe's older brother whom he dearly loved and looked up to, and
Samuel Smith, Joe's younger brother who was pretty much just along for
the ride. Are we starting to understand the quality of the witnesses
that we're working with here?

What I mean is, why the fuck couldn't Joe show the plates to Dr.
Mitchell, or NSSMSSSPPP Charlie Anthon, both of Columbia University
being ancient, and biblical scholars? They were the first educated
scholarly dissenters of Joe's work, and they would have been perfect
candidates to authenticate Joe's work. The thing about scholars is, when
they study something legitimate, they put a lot of time into it, and
document everything just for the pursuit of knowledge. When we compare
real scholars to the 8 witnesses here, we find some major discrepancies
that seem to shoot a lot of holes in Joe's credibility. 

All of the witnesses were related to each other in some way. They didn't
each give individual testimonies, rather, Joe drafted up the witness
statement and had all of them sign it. Not only that, but the testimony
has no exact date/time or setting, and has undergone a major adjustment
from when it was originally recorded to what we see in the BoM now. It
may seem incidental, but the original testimonies were at the end of the
BoM, and the first line in it didn't call Joseph Smith the translator,
but rather, the "Author and Proprietor" of the book. This may seem
insignificant, but it's still worth asking, why did the church change
the original wording of the witness testimony at all? Did they think it
wasn't credible enough calling Joe the Author, and instead went with
"Translator"? And why did they move the testimonies from the end of the
book, to the beginning? Could the book not stand on it's own merits
without preempting the reader with the testimonies at the beginning?

With the small changes aside, remember how I said that most scholars
record everything they are legitimately studying for the pursuit of
knowledge, well, what else do we have from these witnesses, written by
their own hand, regarding this examination? I'm much less concerned with
what Joe wrote and had them sign, I want to hear what the individuals
had to say about the witness, for themselves.

Well, now we really start to run into problems. Christian, Jacob, and
John Whitmer Jr., as well as Big Daddy Cheese, Joe's popa, left no known
trace of their account of the occurence, aside from their signed
statement. You would think that such a monumental occurence in their
lifetime would illicit at least a journal entry, but we simply have
nothing of the sort. But what about the other 4 witnesses?

Well, we have Hyrum Smith, Joe's brother and one of his closest friends
throughout the entirety of the Mormonite religion. He was the first one
who died at the Carthage Jail shootout wherein Joe killed 2 guys, and
was killed himself. Hyrum was holding the door shut and a bullet smashed
through the door and hit Hyrum in the face just below his left eye.
Well, that was in 1844. During an earlier stint in jail with Joe and
some others in 1839, everybody wrote some letters to the saints from the
jail cell they were locked in. This is where we find Hyrum's only other
reference to seeing the plates.

“I thank God that I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the
things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I
had born testimony to."

And that's all we have record of. Like I said, if you had seen a set of
ancient gold plates with another testament of Jesus written on them in
"Reformed Egyptian", wouldn't that be all you could talk about? Wouldn't
that have a dramatic impact on your life?

Let's talk about Samuel Smith for a second. This is the only other
reference we have from him about handling and seeing the plates. This
wasn't even recorded by Samuel himself, it was recounted by a person
named Daniel Tyler who attended one of Samuel Smith, and Orson Hyde's
proselyting sermons, wherein they preached all about the BoM.

"Elder Smith read the 29th chapter of Isaiah at the first meeting and
delineated the circumstances of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon,
of which he said he was a witness. He knew his brother Joseph had the
plates, for the prophet had shown them to him, and he had handled them
and seen the engravings thereon. His speech was more like a narrative
than a sermon."

I think the last sentence in that phrase holds a bit of significance.
"His speech was more like a narrative than a sermon." I can't figure out
if Daniel Tyler was pro or anti-Mormon, but the way he describes this
meeting seems very unexciting and anti-climatic. It seems only
reasonable to think that Samuel Smith would have been rather emphatic
and excited if he was indeed recounting a story of one of the most epic
and spiritual experience of his life.

Well, Samuel did have one other experience on record that's worth
mentioning. He didn't really offer any insight to the authenticity of
his gold plate experience, but he apparently bore his testimony about
the experience. Which is pretty much no different from what people do
about the Book of Mormon in the church today.

This is taken from LDS.org from an article all about Samuel Smith.

"<span id="anchor"></span>One of the Prophet [Joseph
Smith](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/joseph-smith)’s first actions after
The Church of [Jesus Christ](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/jesus-christ)
of Latter-day Saints was organized (sic, it was actually called the
Church of Christ when it was first organized) was to call his trusted
younger brother Samuel to go forth and preach the restored gospel.
Samuel’s attempts to sell copies of the newly published [Book of
Mormon](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/book-of-mormon), with its
seemingly incredible story of angels and visions, had met with little
success until he arrived at the Tomlinson Inn in April
1830.<span id="anchor-1"></span> Samuel Smith gathered his courage,
strode boldly into the inn, and walked across the room directly to
Phineas Young. Holding out a Book of Mormon to him, Samuel said simply,
“There is a book, sir, I wish you to read.”<span id="anchor-2"></span>
Surprised by the young man’s direct approach, Phineas hesitated a
moment, then asked, “Pray, sir, what book have
you?”<span id="anchor-3"></span> “The Book of Mormon,” said Samuel,
“or, as it is called by some, the Golden
[Bible](http://lds.org/scriptures/bible?lang=eng).” Samuel then
testified that the book was a revelation from God and added, “If you
will read this book with a prayerful heart, and ask God to give you a
witness, you will know the truth of this work.” He requested that
Phineas look at the testimony of the witnesses in the front of the book.
After doing so and asking the young man his name, Phineas remarked that
Samuel was one of those witnesses who testified of seeing and handling
the gold plates from which the book was translated.

<span id="anchor-4"></span>“Yes,” said Samuel, “I know the book to be a
revelation from God, translated by the gift and power of the [Holy
Ghost](http://lds.org/study/topics/holy-ghost?lang=eng), and that my
brother Joseph Smith, jun., is a Prophet, Seer and
Revelator.”<span id="anchor-5"></span> Phineas was intrigued. He
bought the book and took it home.<span id="anchor-6"></span> Neither
Phineas nor Samuel realized that their short meeting at the Tomlinson
Inn would later bring about the conversion of a man who would become a
mighty prophet of the Lord."

That's right, Phineas Young, met Samuel Smith at this Tomlinson Inn, and
bought a BoM from him. If only Sam would have known at that point, the
true implications of his actions. If he wouldn't have walked up to that
specific man, in that specific bar, Samuel might have been the second
prophet of the Church of Christ after Joe. Instead, he died a month
after his older brothers were shot in Carthage Jail.

Sorry for the digression from the topic there. Let's talk about Hiram
Page's secondary witness of the Gold plates. Well, I couldn't find the
exact quote, but apparently he testified only about seeing the plates.
He says nothing about hefting them, or manipulating the plates as seems
to be portrayed in the official testimony of the 8 witnesses. Like I
said earlier, if you had seen and held something this monumental and
historically mind blowing, wouldn't you remember the exact circumstances
and feelings of the occurence? Wouldn't a person that goes on to
proselyte about the BoM remember exactly what happened that day in the
woods, and use it as his opening statement when talking to a propective
member? Maybe I'm asking questions from ignorance here, because I wasn't
there to experience the plates like these guys were, but that's because
I'm a jaded millenial. I play with touchscreens all day and drive a fast
car. I can access any information I possibly want, at the speed of
light, at any given time, and even *I *would find the plates superbly
fucking amaze-balls. How could these guys not? I'm even the same age as
Joe, and most of these guys were when they were in the woods looking at
the plates. Even in my jaded state, this would be the most monumental
occurence of my life up to that point, and I wouldn't be able to stop
talking about it.

Well let's leave these 7 witnesses behind for a minute to talk about
John Whitmer. Of the 8 witnesses, John lived the longest, and left the
most on record regarding the plates. This may have something to do with
the fact that he was called as the first official church historian in
1831, and lasted as such until his excommunication in 1838, a month
before Defection-Day. 

Let's read a few things that John Whitmer wrote or said about his
experience with the plates.

This was pulled from a Deseret News article written by Mormon
apologist/reporter Daniel Peterson, and I couldn't find where he pulled
it from, much like Deseret News' usual MO.

"I desire to testify to all that will come to the knowledge of this
address, that I have most assuredly seen the plates from whence the Book
of Mormon is translated, and that I have handled these plates, and know
of a surety that Joseph Smith, Jr., has translated the Book of Mormon by
the gift and power of God. And in this thing the wisdom of the wise most
assuredly has perished. Therefore, know ye, O ye inhabitants of the
earth, wherever this address may come, that I have in this thing freed
my garments of your blood, whether you believe or disbelieve." 

That was a pretty cut and dry testimony of what he saw, but let's get a
few more quotes to try and get a handle on John Whitmer.

I pulled this quote from moroni10.com which is a Mormon apologist
website. I find that some of the best information can be pulled from
websites like this once you cut through all the "church is awesome" and
"Joseph Smith was a real prophet of God" bullshit.

Let me set the scene for you. It's 1835, and a group of men have a
revelation in their hand from Joe himself which seems to be inaccurate.
Well, this group of about 50 men are out for blood because they're sick
of Joe's prolific bullshit. They had sworn to "not eat or drink until
they had murdered Joe", so they were legitimately pissed off. When the
storyline comes to this situation we'll discuss it in detail, but for
now this setting will do. 

John Whitmer was in the group, I'm not sure if he wanted to kill Joe
along with everybody else in the group at the time, but I would assume
so because he was definitely one of the 50. So all of these guys
approach a guy named Theodore Turley, who was a higher up in the church
at the time, and asked where they could find Joe, conveying their
intentions. 

I picture John at the head of the group, and Turley standing up to them
and getting in John's face about what was going on, and the interaction
is detailed as such.

Turley Said **"There are many things published that they say are true,
and again turn around and **say they are false?" John, asked, "Do you
hint at me?" Elder Turley said, "If the cap fits you, wear it; all I
know is that you have published to the world that an angel did present
those plates to Joseph Smith." John replied: "I now say, I handled those
plates; there were fine engravings on both sides. I handled them." Then
he described in the presence of these bitter enemies how the plates were
fastened and he said, "They were shown to me by a supernatural power."**

This seems like quite an interesting back and forth between these church
leaders. Basically, Theodore Turley accused the church historian, John
Whitmer, of testifying of the truthfulness of something, and then
turning around and testifying of it being false. He pretty much called
John a devilish little liar with regard to actually seeing and handling
the plates. Then, John fires back with an 1835 equivalent of "Are you
talkin to me asshole?". Turley lobs back with a quip about John wearing
whatever hat fits, effectively calling him a social chameleon. Then,
John digs in nice and deep to defend himself against these malicious
words. He repeatedly, and emphatically testified of the truthfulness of
the plates and tells everybody about his experience with them. Because,
let's face it, he couldn't go back on everything he had been doing for
the past 6 years of his life, just because this Turley guy was calling
him a liar. So what do liars do when they're confronted with the facts?
They burrow in, hunker down, and throw up a defensive wall, and I think
that's what John did here, when he went way above and beyond what was
necessary to defend his testimony of the plates. Let me remind you, this
was 3 years before he left the church, this guy was in it, for what he
considered, the long haul, no matter what he had to do or say to secure
his position, whether that meant lying or telling, what he considered,
the truth through his testimony.

Let's examine one of the last testimonies we have from John about the
plates. It's in the form of an interview conducted by P. Wilhelm
Poulson, in 1878, and it was published about 2 weeks after John died.
The interview itself was probably conducted about 6 months before John's
death, making it the last thing on record we have from John Whitmer.

"**Q - I am aware that your name is affixed to the testimony in the Book
of Mormon that you saw the plates?  
A - It is so, and that testimony is true.  
Q - Did you handle the plates with your hands?  
A - I did so\!  
Q - Then they were a material substance?  
A - Yes, as material as anything can be.  
Q - Were they heavy to lift?  
A - Yes, and as you know gold is a heavy metal: they were very heavy.  
Q - How big were the leaves?  
A - So far as I recollect, 8 by 6 or seven inches.  
Q - Were the leaves thick?  
A - Yes, just so thick, that characters could be engraven on both
sides.  
Q - How were the leaves joined together?  
**A - In three rings, each one in the shape of a D with the straight
line towards the center.  
Q - In what place did you see the plates?  
A - In Joseph Smith's house; he had them there.  
Q - Did you see them covered with a cloth?  
A - No. He handed them uncovered into our hands, and we turned the
leaves sufficient to satisfy us."**

*__*

*_This almost seems like an open and shut, irrefutable testimony of the
plates standalone. But, when it's examined in comparison to the
testimony of the 8 witnesses and the other testimonies of John Whitmer,
there seems to be some problems. _*

*__*

*_Let's deconstruct the written testimony in the Book of Mormon as best
we can to try and tease out any discrepencies between the official
witness statement, and what the witnesses claimed in the years following
the publishing of the BoM._*

*__*

**It starts out **"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and
people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the
author and proprietor of this work, has shown unto us the plates of
which hath been spoken"**

*__*

****I pause here to bring focus to the style it's written in. People in
that day didn't speak in Elizabethan english like the BoM is written in,
they talked in much the way extreeeemly uneducated hicks would nowdays.
That's why the original BoM has phrases like "the Lamanites were
a-comin" and stuff like that, the Elizabethan english just makes it
sound authoritative and from God because people were so familiar with
the style of the King James Bible. Why the hell is this testimony
written in the same way? This is just a witness testimony of the people
that saw the book, it should have been written in the way they would be
speaking or writing at that time. Well, it's written this way because
Joe himself wrote it. You see, Joe had this ability to snap in and out
of old english style of speaking, and that's how he differentiated his
speaking, from God speaking through him giving divine revelation. Well,
this is written in the same, old english manner, and it sounds pretty
legit.**

*__*

**Let's move on to the next line. **"which have the appearance of
gold;"**

*__*

*_Apologists love this line in the testimony. The question is often
raised, if the book of plates were indeed made of gold, how could Joe
and others move them around so easily? If they were indeed the
dimensions described, they would weigh over 200 lbs, we've gone over
this before. How would Joe have been able to carry them through the
woods, running at top speed and fending off attackers? How would people
be able to "heft" them or move them around on a table, if it should have
taken 2 strong men to even budge them? Well, this is the cop-out
apologists like to use. "they had the appearance of gold" doesn't mean
they were gold. _*

*_The problem with this excuse, as with many other excuses, is Joe. He
said that an angel visited him in his room and would give him a book
made of plates of pure gold. If a real angel of God says gold, it means
gold. It said nothing about appearing gold, nothing about them being a
gold alloy to lighten them up, just pure gold. Once again, Joe takes aim
at his own foot, and pulls the trigger, while current day apologists try
to bandage up the profuse bleeding._*

*__*

**Next, the testimony said **"and as many of the leaves as the said
Smith has translated we did handle with our hands"**

*__*

*_First thing we need to talk about this is the exact verbiage of "as
many of the leaves as the said smith has translated". The Gold plates
were massive with two separate partitions. The first portion is what Joe
translated from, and it was supposedly the open part of the plates. The
second, and larger portion, was supposedly sealed to be translated at a
later date. Hingepin Sidney Rigdon was even quoted saying he knows
what's in the sealed portion of the plates without ever having seen the
plates himself. At the time, he was probably trying to set himself up as
a future prophet, but that's neither here nor there. Well, there's
absolutely no reference to this specific trait about the plates, it just
talks about the witnesses seeing all the plates that Joe supposedly
translated from. You would think that the sealed portion would spark
somebodys interest. If not during this testimony, then the separate,
sealed portion, should at least have been referenced later, but it
simply wasn't. None of these supposed witnesses talked about it. _*

*__*

**The next line is as follows, talking about the plates **"and we also
saw the engravings thereon, all **of which has the appearance of ancient
work, and of curious workmanship."**

*__*

****I may be nitpicking here, but how does this uneducated group of dirt
poor back-country bumpkins know what ancient work looks like? And what
the hell classifies something as being "of curious workmanship"? And why
was that specific line, that was initially used to describe the Liahona
in the first book of Nephi, used to describe the Golden plates? "Curious
workmanship" is one of Joe's favorite catchphrases, when describing
something indescribable. Why is this the most detailed description we
get of any ancient artifact when it's reported by Joe? Beyond that, did
the group really see the "engravings thereon" on the actual plates, or
did they see a piece of paper that had some reformed Egyptian written on
it? By this standard, NSSMSSSPPP Charlie Anthon saw the engravings
thereon just as much as these 8 witnesses did when NSSM brought the
caractors manuscript to him, and he was an educated college professor
that called bullshit on Joe. It may be all a matter of symantics, and
overanalyzing what's in the testimony, but it at least seems like
something worth mentioning.**

*__*

**Let's finish it up **"And this we bear record with words of soberness,
that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and
know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have
spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world
that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it."**

*__*

****There really isn't much to say about this part, except to draw
attention to the almost legalistic nature of the wording. It says "said
Smith" twice, in one sentence, and then says the powerful words of "and
we lie not". Remember, this statement was written by Joe himself,
speaking for the undersigned witnesses.**

*_When a young child, or anybody for that matter, does something and
then lies about it, like taking a cookie from the cookie jar, for
example. They say something like "No daddy, I didn't take the cookie, I
swear I'm not lying", and any parent knows how paper thin that facade
is. It goes the same for most adults as well. When a person emphatically
states that they aren't lying, they probably just are. That's why good
liars are hard to pin down, because they never tell you I'm not lying to
you, they simply spin a web of lies that seem internally coherent, and
slowly wrap it around the person they're lying to. _*

*_Well, I think this statement is very symptomatic of Joe doing pulling
the "I'm totally not lying" trick. He was a liar by trade, which has
become abundantly clear by this point in his life. But, I think the
problem he had was, the simple fact that there wasn't enough thread
built into the BoM itself by this point, to spin a complete web of lies.
There was still some major holes, so, Joe had to try and patch up the
holes, by telling anybody that read the witness testimonies that he
wasn't lying, and nobody else that saw the plates was lying either. You
would think that the book could stand on it's own merits, if it were
indeed true._*

*__*

*_There really isn't much more to talk about when it comes to the 8
witnesses. In comparing the official statement in the BoM, to what the
witnesses reported individually later on, the connections are paper
thin. We also have a problem with the settings when we take into account
John Whitmer's 1879 interview. The story reports that Joe led the
witnesses into the woods, where the plates were, and the witnesses
examined them and signed Joe's written statement. Well, in the interview
John said that he saw the plates in Joe's house. The setting doesn't
match up at all there. None of the translation happened inside the Smith
home, and John couldn't have been referring to Joe's house that Joe
bought from his father in law Isaac Hale in Harmony PA, because John
didn't even meet Joe until D-Day David Whitmer brought Joe, Emma, Ollie
and Sam to live with them in Fayette, NY. The timeline simply doesn't
match up, and it's a major discrepancy in John's testimony of the
witnessing account. _*

*__*

*_It really says something about the veracity of this entire 8 witness
claim if the only witness that left anything substantial behind relating
to witnessing the plates contradicted himself, and the reported story
about the setting of the plates at the same time. Not only that, but
when John was defending himself against Theodore Turley in 1835, he said
that he saw the plates by a supernatural power, but in the 1879
interview, he stated that he handled the plates, and that Joe handed the
plates to him uncovered so he could see the plates and "turn the leaves
sufficient to satisfy us". There isn't anything supernatural about that,
nor does it require anything supernatural to explain anything about the
plates. _*

**This phrase supernatural power is something of a recurring theme
throughout the testimonies of both the 8, and the 3 witnesses. I haven't
used this phrase in a while, but it's talking about stoned sight. Joe
was the master of stoned sight when he would use precious in Mr. Hat to
look for buried treasure, or translate the gold plates. Well, I would
make the argument that this was what John Whitmer was **referring to.**

*__*

*_If this seems unbelievable, let's look at the testimony of the 3
witnesses, in comparison to what the witnesses said individually in the
years following, regarding their experience. _*

*__*

*_This is the testimony of the 3 witnesses. _*

****"**Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this
record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the
Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came
from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we also **know that they
have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath
declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is
true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are
upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God,
and not **of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel
of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes,
that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; **and we
know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And
it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord
commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient
unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we
know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the
blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of
Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor
be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one
God. Amen.**

Oliver Cowdery

David Whitmer

Martin Harris"

*__*

*_It isn't worth rehashing all the same phrases that this testimony
shares with that of the 8 witnesses, so I'm just going to pick out the
phrases that are unique to this testimony, and try to deconstruct
them._*

*__*

**Let's start off with one of the first lines "**That we, through the
grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates
which contain this record".**

*__*

*_This may seem insignificant right now, but there might be a little
wink-nod to stoned sight hidden in there. It says explicitly that
"through the grace of god... we have seen the plates". Standalone, this
phrase is extremely insignificant, but when we couple it with all the
other phrases that sound similar to it, we start to get an idea of
what's really going on here._*

*__*

**The next line to focus on is **"we also know that they have been
translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it
unto us".**

*__*

**Translated by the gift and power of god? I suppose one could make the
argument that the Urim and Thummim that Joe used were running off of
magic Mormon Jesus power, but that's ignoring the setting in which the
plates were translated. In Isaac Hale's affidavit, he said that Joe
translated the **plates while they were at the same time in the woods.
That seems like a much more likely explanation for the phrase
"translated by the power of God". Most of the time that Joe was
translating the BoM, the plates were still supposedly hidden in the
woods. Joe probably took the plates with him when he moved to the
Whitmer house in Fayette, but I still doubt that he was literally
translating from the plates, or else every single person living in the
house would have an amazing irrefutable testimony of watching Joe
dictate from the Gold plates day after day, while they were writing the
BoM. It seems like another wink-nod to the fact that Joe didn't have a
physical set of plates that were up to snuff.**

*__*

**The next line like this is one of the most important. **"wherefore we
know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have
seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown
unto us by the power of God, and not of man."**

*__*

**This is a powerful line with the emphasis on the right section of the
sentence. This line blatantly tells us that these witnesses didn't see
the plates in any sort of natural circumstance, but that they were
**shown to the witnesses by the power of God. What could that possibly
mean other than stoned sight? **

*__*

**The next line is even more revealing. **"And we declare with words of
soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought
and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the
engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the
Father, and our Lord **Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that
these things are true"**

*__*

****First off, why was the angel shenanigan necessary? This occurence
supposedly happened before the 8 witnesses saw the plates, and Joe just
led those guys into the woods and showed them the plates. But for some
reason, when the 3 witnesses saw the plates, an unspecified angel of the
lord had to bring them down and show them to the group. But, that's not
even the most damning part of this piece of the testimony. It says that
the angel laid the plates before our eyes, and they beheld the
engravings thereon, then it transitions to saying we know by the grace
of God that it's true. Is there anything missing here? Why the fuck did
the 8 witnesses get to heft the plates and turn the leaves with their
own hands, but the 3 witnesses had a strictly hands off policy? Why
didn't NSSM, Ollie, and D-Day David get to lift and play with the plates
like the other group of witnesses? This question becomes even more
weighted when you consider that NSSM, the man that was about to finance
publishing the BoM, didn't get to touch the plates, but rather saw them
through the grace and power of God. We'll get into the details of this
in a minute, as well as the theories as to why shit went down this
way.**

*__*

**The next line we need to talk about takes us to the end of the
testimony. **"it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of
the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be
obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these
things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our
garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the
judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the
heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, which is one God. Amen."**

*__*

*_I think that it's important to focus on the beginning of that set, to
fully understand the rest of the testimony. It says, "the voice of the
lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore to be
OBEDIENT unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these
things". Exactly what commandments of God were they being obedient to?
Was there a verse in the bible that said something to the effect of
three witnesses reporting to the world what they had just seen by the
grace and power of God? NO\! Joe was the conduit to God that they all
believed in, and they would do exactly what he said because they thought
it was a commandment straight from God. Does that mean Joe just told
these guys that God commands you to witness the plates, and testify to
the world what you have seen? That would just be ridiculous\! But guess
what, that's exactly what happened..... in multiple places no less._*

*__*

*_This was written in the BoM, in Ether chapter 5 verses 2-4 _*

*__*

*_"2)And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto
those who shall assist to bring forth this work; 3)And unto three shall
they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety
that these things are true. 4)And in the mouth of three witnesses shall
these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work,
in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of
which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record – and all
this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day."_*

*__*

*_That was supposedly written by Moroni around 420 C.E. Did any of the
phrases seem familiar thoroughout that? "Three shall be shown by the
power of God" "They will know of a surety that these things are true".
It's almost like the testimony of the three witnesses was written by
Moroni, or maybe it was the other way around. Maybe whoever wrote
Moroni, wrote the testimony of the three witnesses._*

*__*

*_Surprisingly enough, this wasn't the only commandment written about
the 3 witnesses. This was just seen as prophecy at this point. Joe
needed a proper commandment to make these guys testify of the
truthfulness of the plates. Get ready for a rapid fire of other
scriptures prophesying of, or commanding the three witnesses._*

*__*

**2 NE 27:12-13 "Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered
unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes
of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that
three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to
whom the book shall **be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth
of the book and the things therein. 13)And there is none other which
shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear
testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath
said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the
dead"**

*__*

*_That was just another prophecy of the witnesses. Remember, Ether and 2
NE were some of the last books chronologically written in the Book of
Mormon when Joe was making up for the lost 116 pages that NSSM took and,
reportedly "lost"._*

*__*

**Now let's read the commandments Joe gave in the Doctrine and Covenants
regarding the 3 **witnesses.**

*__*

*_D\&C 5:10-13 "10)But this generation shall have my word through you;_*

11)And in addition to your testimony, the testimony of three of my
servants, whom I shall call and ordain, unto whom I will show these
things, and they shall go forth with my words that are given through
you.

12)Yea, they shall know of a surety that these things are true, for from
heaven will I declare it unto them.

13)I will give them power that they may behold and view these things as
they are;"

*__*

*_And of course, D\&C 17:1-5 _*

**"**1)**Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which
if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the
plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and
Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when
he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which
were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red
Sea. **

*_2)_*And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even
by that faith which was had by the prophets of old. 

3\) And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your
eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God; 

4\) And this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be
destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the
children of men in this work. 

5\) And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant
Joseph Smith, Jun., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has
seen them, and it is because he had faith."

*__*

*_That was probably a little redundant, but I thinks it's important to
try and get into the mindset of the individuals that were seeing these
plates. Hopefully we'll be able to better understand the context in
which these testimonies were signed. It's not quite as cut and dry as
the face value permits._*

**When it comes to these testimonies, I'm not sure what I personally
think, but there really only seems like one possibility that fits
everything best. When you're talking about the 8 witnesses, there are
only a few possibilities for what actually happened. One, is that Joe
was a real prophet with a real set of plates, and showed these 8
individuals the real deal under the direction of God. I don't think this
is very **likely, given countless reasons that made me decide to start a
podcast about real Mormon history. But I can't rule that out completely,
and still call myself entirely intellectually honest. **

*_Every other possibility posits that Joe was a fraud. One of these
possibilities would be Joe having a set of plates at this time in 1829.
It was 6 years after he said he would be pulling gold plates out of the
ground, and he may have painted his mock set with some gold paint and
done a real good job of making a fraudulent set. Let's face it,
historical frauds have accomplished much more challenging feats in the
past. This may have fooled the 8 witnesses into reluctantly signing the
testimony, but Joe thought his fake plates might not pass the critical
examination of the much older and wiser NSSM. This required a visionary
examination of the plates for the 3 witnesses, and still allowed an
examination of the physical plates by the 8 witnesses._*

*_But the theory that I align myself with is much more sinister. I don't
agree with it because I'm trying to villify Joe and his buddies, or
anything like that, even if it may sound that way. I align myself with
this theory because it has the most explanatory power for everything
that happened, and requires only a small group of individuals to
conspire together, in order to make it happen._*

*_I personally believe that Joseph Smith Jr., Joseph Smith Sr., Samuel
Smith, Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Hiram Page, Christian, Jacob, John,
Peter Jr., and David Whitmer were all in on the scheme together, and
Martin Harris was the target of them conspiring together to get his
money._*

*_This may seem pessimistic or sinister, but let's look at the facts.
First off, it worked\! We're talking about it today only because Joe was
able to get Marty's money to publish the BoM, and start his own church
in the first place. But that's not the only reason I think this was what
happened. I think that the 8 witnesses signing their testimony was just
one more piece Joe used as ammunition against Marty's rather weak
psyche, and mediocre skepticism. I don't believe this in a vacuum. Look
at the quality of the witnesses. All of the 8 witnesses were from 2
families that were dirt poor, and heavily aligned in their goals of
making money off Joe's new Jesus book. 2 of the 3 witnesses were Joe's
best buddies that had helped him author the Book of Mormon for the past
year, and they had everything to lose if Marty didn't follow through
with the money, at the end of the equation._*

*__*

*_You guys know what I like to do in shows like this. When I'm talking
about a conspiracy like this that's up for conjecture, I like to support
my claims with quotes from the relevant people. Well, let me do that
now. _*

*_The 3 witness testimony that we have, was actually sythesized from
more than one occassion. We're going to read a fairly large excerpt from
the History of the church Vol 1:54 written by Joe himself. There's a lot
going on, so I'll comment on it as we go._*

*__*

*_"Not many days after the above commandment was given, we four, viz.,
Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself, agreed to
retire into the woods, and try to obtain, by fervent and humble prayer,
the fulfilment of the promises given in the above revelation—that they
should have a view of the plates. We accordingly made choice of a piece
of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired, and
having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to
bestow upon us a realization of these promises."_*

*_Basically, Joe had received all the revelations we read earlier,
stating that 3 men, called of God, would be witnesses to the plates, so
these four men, Ollie, D-Day, Marty, and Joe went into the woods by the
Whitmer house to obtain the vision._*

"The Order of Prayer.

According to previous arrangement, I commenced prayer to our Heavenly
Father, and was followed by each of the others in succession. We did not
at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of
divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer,
each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the
same result as before."

This just said that Joe started praying fervently that God would reveal
the plates to the group, and everybody else followed his lead. After
they tried once without success, all the men in the group prayed in
rotation to have the plates revealed to them, like some kind of mushroom
induced, seyonce in the woods shit or something. The second attempt
failed as well. Just wait for the next part, because this is when the
turn happens, and the con that Joe, Ollie, and D-Day were pulling really
starts to come out.

"The Visitation of the Angel—Viewing the Plates.

Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he should
withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his
presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for."

What I picture here, is Joe, Ollie, and D-Day were all engaged in this
seyonce-like praying without success, and sort of looking over at the
nay-sayer NSSM, and giving him signals and body language that he might
be why the angel hasn't descended to show them the plates yet. Joe's
persuasion skills were about to be tested above and beyond any skill
level he's attempted before.

"He \[Marty\] accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again, and
had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a
light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel
stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been
praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by
one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings theron
distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said,
"David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments;" when,
immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light
above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God,
and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of
them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of
what you now see and hear."

So Marty had left the group and suddenly an angel floated down in a
pillar of light and showed the plates to Ollie, Joe and D-Day David.
Then the angel told D-Day, for some reason, that blessed is the lord,
which doesn't really make any sense, and also he that keeps the lords
commandments. Apparently Ollie and Joe weren't important enough for the
angel to address. According to this, the angel held the plates, and even
turned the leaves individually, so the three men could see the
engravings thereon distinctly. This must have been a pretty amazing
experience, or like I am trying to suggest, and make a case for, it was
the most critical point, for the con to work on Marty. Either Marty
would walk away calling it all nonsense at this exact moment, or he
would decide to believe, while being heavily influenced by Joe, Ollie,
and D-Day. Let's find out what happened next. Remember this is all from
history of the church vol. 1, written by Joseph Smith as a first hand
account, as the instigator of all this batshittery.

"Martin Harris also Views the Plates.

I now left David and Oliver, and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom
I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon
told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and
earnestly requested me to join him in prayer, that he also might realize
the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in
prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet
finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again
opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst
at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of
joy, " 'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have
beheld;" and jumping up, he shouted, "Hosanna," blessing God, and
otherwise rejoiced exceedingly."

That was the turn. Joe just leveled up in his persuasion skill tree, and
the world has this one moment to thank, for the gensis of the Book of
Mormon, and the Church of Christ under Joseph Smith. Everything boiled
down to this point. If things hadn't gone perfectly in favor of Joe's
way during this scene in the woods, we would have nothing to talk about
today, and Joe never would have created his empire in the way that
history tells us today. 

Joe, Ollie, and D-Day had put so much pressure on Marty, to see what
they wanted him to see, and Marty knew he was the last sticking point
for the BoM to be published. Marty was a weird-tempered, God-crazed
zealot, that thought Joe was completely legit. He was the odd man out
that was under an immense amount of peer pressure from his fellow
pre-Mormonites, and he didn't want to let them, or God, down because he
wasn't spiritual, or pious, enough to see the vision that the other
three were having. That's why he left the group to go pray a
considerable distance away. Once everybody else "saw" the plates, Joe
broke away from that group to go find Marty.

Joe found him kneeling down and praying, and Marty "earnestly" asked Joe
to join him so that he could see what everybody else saw. Joe knelt down
and I bet it went something like this. I'm going to try to channel Joe.

"Lord, Lord, God of all that is holy. We know that we are not worthy to
be your servants, but we ask that you would show us, that which is
desirous in our hearts. Lord please let it be known to Martin that this
work is indeed the work that you have appointed to us. Let him
understand his place in the earthly kingdom of God which is about to
come forth to the children of men. Please Lord, show us by your power
the holy gold plates from which we have translated the account of the
ancient inhabitants of this promised land, which we thank you for
bestowing upon us. If there be any sins that make us unworthy to see
your truth, then please forgive us our trespasses, for we do not wish to
carry the burden of sin with us into the kingdom of God. Please lord,
show us your holy gold plates." 

"Martin, Martin\! I see them. They are glorious\! The angel is showing
me the holy golden plates\! He's turning the leaves one by one\! I can
see the engravings thereon\! Blessed is the Lord and his son Jesus
Christ for their mercy unto me, their modern day prophet. Do you see
them Martin, they are so beautiful\! The angel is white beyond any
whiteness that is in nature\! Do you see the angel holding the plates
Martin?\! What a glorious sight to behold\!"

What does Marty do in a situation like this? Put yourself in his shoes.
Does he say you guys are full of shit and walk away? If he does that,
and Joe is really a prophet, it's a one way ticket to hell for Marty.
Does he continue to say he doesn't believe and needs a greater witness
to believe? Joe already gave him revelation that "He seeketh a greater
witness, but none can be given"(refer to episode 17 for the situation
there). It was go time\! The manuscript was done, and they needed
Marty's money to start printing the Book of Mormon. Marty had even said
that even if it is false, he will make money of it (see episode 4 for
that) So what choice did Marty have when all these pressures were
collapsing on him. He was the one piece of rock along a fault line that
would either give way and allow the shifting earthquake to happen, or be
sheered off and lost to the annals of history forever as a nobody. So
what did he do? He gave in to the pressures surrounding him, and gave
Joe the confirmation, that Joe, Ollie, and D-day were pressuring Marty
into conforming with.

It may have just been a white lie, or maybe Marty really did hallucinate
and see the angel holding the plates, but his ecstasy filled exclamation
of" 'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have
beheld; Hosanna," was enough for Joe. He probably threw a couple "Glory
be to God the most merciful and high of all" in there to add to the
effect. And thus, the seeds of the Mormonite religion were planted for
Joe to reap less than a year later when he gathered the first
congregation in Fayette N.Y., on April 6<sup>th</sup> 1830.

Earlier in this episode I was talking about how monumental this
occassion would have been for anybody that would've experienced it. At
the time I was referring to the 8 witnesses not leaving behind very much
about witnessing the plates, aside from the signed testimony, and John
Whitmer, who was the official church historian. Well, it wasn't any
different for these three gentlemen. This would have been one of the
most epic experiences of their entire lives.

The problem we have is Joe. He recorded things either, as he remembered
them, or in a way that would best serve his purposes. For example, the
revelations that were given about the three witnesses in the BoM, and
the Doctrine and Covenants that we read earlier, explicitly state that
the 3 witnesses would see, not only the plates, but the chestplate, Urim
and Thummim, sword of Laban, and the Liahona given to Lehi on the shores
of the Red Sea. Well the official testimony in the BoM says NOTHING
about these other items. It only says that an angel brought down the
plates and showed them to the 3 witnesses. It doesn't even make
reference to Joe being there, when he was the one instigating and
influencing everything in the first place. 

Another problem Joe created was what the angel said to D-Day David that
was recorded in the History of the Church version of witnessing the
plates. Joe recorded that the angel told D-Day "blessed is the Lord" and
all that gobbledy-gook, but apparently Joe and Ollie, who were kneeling
right next to D-Day at this time, weren't important enough, for the
angel to address. Well, that's because according to an interview that
believer Elder Edward Stevenson had with D-Day, the angel appeared to
him before they all went into the woods, while he was ploughing a field.
That was when the line was given addressing D-Day. Then, shortly after
that visitation, Joe and Ollie approached D-Day and said, "Come David,
and be one of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon". This is a huge time
discrepancy between the two accounts.

Joe just grabbed whatever he could, and put it into his own version of
the 3 witness occurence. All of this being said, we haven't even
addressed the biggest discrepency between the revelation version of what
would happen with the three witnesses, as opposed to what was recorded.
Where the fuck were the chestplate, and Urim and Thummim, and all these
other pieces from antiquity? Why the hell didn't anybody talk about
those? Why didn't Joe record anything about those in the BoM version of
the official witness testimony, or in the History of the Church
version?\! This is a huge problem and one more score against Joe on his
prophetic scorecard.

Well, D-Day and Marty did end up talking about these other toys, but it
was much later than the actual recorded versions. Unfortunately, we
don't have shit from Ollie about the vision, aside from his signature in
the BoM. So, let's hear what D-Day and Marty each had to say in regards
to these other badass little trinkets being in the vision, along with
the angel holding the plates.

This is D-Day David's account of that morning given in an interview with
E.C. Briggs, and reported on Apr 25<sup>th</sup>, 1884.

"In June, 1829, I \[David Whitmer\] saw the angel by the power of God,
Joseph, Oliver and I were alone, and a light from heaven shone round us,
and solemnity pervaded our minds. The angel appeared in the light, as
near as that young man. \[Within five or six feet\]. Between us and the
angel there appeared a table, and there lay upon it the sword of Laban,
the Ball of Directors, the Record, and Interpreters. The angel took the
Record, and turned the leaves, and showed it to us by the power of God.
They were taken away by the angel to a cave, which we saw by the power
of God while we were yet in the Spirit. ..."

Another quote that D-Day gave regarding the vision, was in an interview
with Edward Stevenson in Dec of 1877, it provided the same details, but
ended with the line "and thus the vision ended"  

*_Apparently D-Day did see everything else that was promised in the
prior revelations in the BoM and D\&C, but I think it's important to
keep an eye on the last lines of his statements. "They were taken away
by the angel to a cave, which we saw BY THE POWER OF GOD WHILE WE WERE
YET IN THE SPIRIT", as well as "and thus the VISION ended". This holds a
lot of weight really soon, and I'll explain why, once we look at a few
quotes from NSSM._*

*__*

*_First we'll see what Marty said concerning the other trinkets in
addition to the plates. This is from an interview with Marty, conducted
by Edward Stevenson and published in the Millenial Star in June 1886. _*

*_"\[We\] asked him to explain the manner in which the plates containing
the characters of the Book of Mormon were exhibited to the witnesses.
Brother Harris said that the angel stood on the opposite side of the
table on which were the plates, the interpreter, \&c., and took the
plates in his hands and turned them over. To more fully illustrate this
to them, Brother Martin took up a book and turned the leaves over one by
one." _*

*__*

*_We know from Joe's account in the History of the Church, that that
wasn't what Marty saw. Marty was separate from the group when they
supposedly saw the table with everything on it. Unless the angel gave
Marty the same exact witness as it did Ollie, D-Day and Joe, which would
make sense, but isn't what Marty said happened in his initial account.
The contradictions run deep with this one._*

*__*

*_The next quote we're going to read is something that brings everything
together, if it hasn't been made abundantly clear by this point. It's by
John H. Gilbert quoting a conversation he had with Marty, but we're
going to read a bunch of it, just for fun._*

*__*

*_Let me set the scene here. By the time 1893 had rolled around, the
topic of the Mormons was something that was on everybodys minds. The
church was undergoing a major political battle to gain statehood, but
the government wouldn't grant it because of their practice of polygamy.
Well, the 1893 worlds fair had an exhibit about the Mormons, and a man
named John H. Gilbert decided to make a statement about the Mormons, and
include it with some photographs of the Hill Cumorah, to be included in
the exhibit. We're going to read a few excerpts from it, but the last
paragraph is the most telling and pertinent to what we've been talking
about this entire episode. This will take us to the end of the history
for this episode. _*

*__*

****" I am a practical printer by trade.  I have been a resident of
Palmyra, New York, since about the year 1824, and during all that time
have done some typesetting each year.  I was aged ninety years on the
13th day of April 1892, and on that day I went to the office of the
Palmyra Courier and set **a stickful of type.**

        My recollection of past events, and especially of the matters
connected with the printing of the "Mormon Bible" \[Book of Mormon\], is
very accurate and faithful, and I have made the following memorandum at
request, to accompany the photographs of "Mormon Hill," which have been
made for the purpose of exhibits at the World's Fair in 1893.

        In the forepart of June, 1829, Mr. E. \[Egbert\] B. Grandin, the
printer of the Wayne Sentinel, came to me and said he wanted I should
assist him in estimating the cost of printing 5,000 copies of a book
that Martin Harris wanted to get printed, which was called the "Mormon
Bible."  It was the second application of Harris to Grandin to do the
job--Harris assuring Grandin that the book would be printed in Rochester
if he declined the job again.

        Harris proposed to have Grandin do the job, if he would, as it
would be quite expensive to keep a man in Rochester during the printing
of the book, who would have to visit Palmyra two or three times a week
for manuscript, etc.  Mr. Grandin consented to do the job if his terms
were accepted.

        A few pages of the manuscript were submitted as a specimen of
the whole, and it was said there would be about 500 pages.

        The contract was to print, and bind with leather, 5,000 copies
for $3,000.  Mr. Grandin got a new font of small pica, on which the body
of the work was printed.

        When the printer was ready to commence work, \[Martin\] Harris
was notified, and Hyrum Smith brought the first installment of
manuscript, of 24 pages, closely written on common foolscap paper-- he
had it under his vest, and vest and coat closely buttoned over it.  At
night \[Hyrum\] Smith came and got the manuscript, and with the same
precaution carried it away.  The next morning with the same
watchfulness, he brought it again, and at night took it away.  This was
kept up for several days.  The title page was first set up, and after
proof was read and corrected, several copies were printed for Harris and
his friends.  On the second day--\[Martin\] Harris and \[Hyrum\] Smith
being in the office--I called their attention to a grammatical error,
and asked whether I should correct it?  \[Martin\] Harris consulted with
\[Hyrum\] Smith a short time, and turned to me and said, "The Old
Testament is ungrammatical, set it as it is written."

        After working a few days, I said to \[Hyrum\] Smith on his
handing me the manuscript in the morning, "Mr. \[Hyrum\] Smith, if you
would leave this manuscript with me, I would take it home with me at
night and read and punctuate it, and I could get along faster in the
daytime, for now I have frequently to stop and read half a page to find
how to punctuate it."  His reply was, "We are commanded not to leave
it."  A few mornings after this, when \[Hyrum\] Smith handed me the
manuscript, he said to me, "If you will give your word that this
manuscript shall be returned to us when you get through with it, I will
leave it with you."  I assured Smith that it should be returned all
right when I got through with it.  For two or three nights I took it
home with me and read it, and punctuated it with a lead pencil. This
will account for the punctuation marks in pencil, which is referred to
in the Mormon Report, an extract from which will be found below.

        Martin Harris, Hyrum Smith and Oliver Cowdery, were very
frequent visitors to the office during the printing of the Mormon Bible
\[Book of Mormon\].  The manuscript was supposed to be in the
handwriting of \[Oliver\] Cowdery.  Every chapter, if I remember
correctly, was one solid paragraph, without a punctuation mark, from
beginning to end.

        Names of persons and places were generally capitalized, but
sentences had no end.  The character or short "&" was used almost
invariably where the word "and" occurred, except at the end of a
chapter.  I punctuated it to make it read as I supposed the author
intended, and but very little punctuation was altered in proofreading. 
The Bible \[Book of Mormon\] was printed sixteen pages at a time, so
that one sheet of paper made two copies of sixteen pages each, requiring
2,000 sheets of paper for each form of sixteen pages.  There were
thirty-seven forms of sixteen pages each--570 pages in all.

        The work was commenced in August 1829, and finished in March
1830--seven months.  Mr. J. H. Bortles and myself did the presswork
until December taking nearly three days to each form.

        \[Oliver\] Cowdery held and looked over the manuscript when most
of the proofs were read.  Martin Harris once or twice, and Hyrum Smith
once, Grandin supposing these men could read their own writing as well,
if not better, than anyone else; and if there are any discrepancies
between the Palmyra edition and the manuscript these men should be held
responsible.

        Joseph Smith, Jr., had nothing to do whatever with the printing
or furnishing copy for the printers, being but once in the office during
the printing of the Bible \[Book of Mormon\], and then not over fifteen
or twenty minutes.

        Hyrum Smith was a common laborer, and worked for anyone as he
was called on.

\[Oliver\] Cowdery taught school winters--so it was said--but what he
did summers, I do not know.

        Martin Harris was a farmer, owning a good farm, of about 150
acres, about a mile north of Palmyra Village, and had money at
interest.  Martin--as everybody called him--was considered by his
neighbors a very honest man; but on the subject of Mormonism, he was
said to be crazy.  Martin was the main spoke in the wheel of Mormonism
in its start in Palmyra, and I may say, the only spoke.  In the fall of
1827, he told us what wonderful discoveries Jo \[Joseph\] Smith had
made, and of his finding plates in a hill in the town of Manchester
(three miles south of Palmyra), --also found with the plates a large
pair of "spectacles," by putting which on his nose and looking at the
plates, the spectacles turned the hieroglyphics into good English.  The
question might be asked here whether Jo \[Joseph\] or the spectacles was
the translator?

        Sometime in 1828, Martin Harris, who had been furnished by
someone with what he said was a facsimile of the hieroglyphics of one of
the plates started for New York.  On his way he stopped at Albany and
called on Lieutenant Governor Bradish--with what success I do not know. 
He proceeded to New York, and called on Professor C. \[Charles\] Anthon,
made known his business and presented his hieroglyphics.

        This is what the professor said in regard to them--1834--

        "The paper in question was, in fact, a singular scroll.

        It consisted of all kinds of singular characters, disposed in
columns, and had evidently been prepared by some person who had before
him, at the time, a book containing various alphabets; Greek and Hebrew
letters, crosses and flourishes, Roman letters inverted or placed
sidewise, arranged and placed in perpendicular columns, and the whole
ended in a rude delineation of a circle, divided into various
compartments, arched with various strange marks, and evidently copied
after the Mexican Calendar, given by Humboldt, but copied in such a way
as not to betray the source whence it was derived.  I am thus particular
as to the contents of the paper, inasmuch as I have frequently conversed
with my friends on the subject since the Mormon excitement began, and
well remember that the paper contained anything else but "Egyptian
Hieroglyphics."

        Martin \[Harris\] returned from this trip east satisfied that
"Joseph" was a "little smarter than Professor Anthon."

        Martin was something of a prophet--he frequently said that
"Jackson would be the last president that we would have; and that all
persons who did not embrace Mormonism in two years' time would be
stricken off the face of the earth."  He said that Palmyra was to be the
New Jerusalem, and that her streets were to be paved with gold.

        Martin was in the office when I finished setting up the
testimony of the Three Witnesses-- (\[Martin\] Harris--\[Oliver\]
Cowdery and \[David\] Whitmer).  I said to him, "Martin, did you see
those plates with your naked eyes?"  Martin looked down for an instant,
raised his eyes up, and said, "No, I saw them with a spiritual eye." 

That brought it all together. These men never saw anything with their
natural eyes. They never really saw an angel descend from the clouds in
a pillar of light. They never handled the plates. They never saw the
chestplate, Liahona, sword of Laban, or Urim and Thummim. To bring this
all to a close, we need one more quote written by somebody quoting Marty
himself.

"Martin Harris, one of the subscribing witnesses of the plates has come
out at last, and says he never saw the plates, from which the book
purports to have been translated, except in vision; and he further says
that any man who says he has seen them in any other way is a liar,
Joseph not excepted."

**What do you think? Should we take the tesimonies of the 3 and the 8
witnesses at face value like Mormon apologist Richard L. Anderson
suggests? Or, should we really question the veracity of the claims,
judged by the standards we judge every other historical claim? Should we
really just bend over and take these historically flimsy statements for
what they say, and nothing more? Or, should we skepticize everything
about these cardboard claims, written by the hand of Joseph Smith
himself, and reluctantly signed by the 11 others, that had everything to
lose if the Book of Mormon failed? I suppose **it's up to you, the
listener to decide.**

*__*

*__*

*__*
