---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 25 - Joe in Charge
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-25-joe-charge/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-25-joe-in-charge
category: History
date: 2015-12-10 21:52:46 PST
---

Ep 25 – Joe in Charge

On this episode, we discuss what happened from March, to July 1831. Joe
makes his own trek from Kirtland, OH, to Independence, MO. This was done
in the wake of the missionary journey by Ollie, Cowdung (Oliver
Cowdery), Dick (Zyba)n Peterson, Peter Whitmer, and P-cubed (Parley P.
Pratt), along with Freddy Willey (Frederick G. Williams). Joe wasn't
satisfied with their success, so he decided to take charge, and handle
the proselyting campaign in Missouri for himself. Or, maybe he was just
searching for some solace for the trauma that was happening in his own
life. If only we could step into Joseph's mind for just a second. . .

Links:**  
  
**GoFundMe page: <https://www.gofundme.com/6months2books>**   
  
**Patreon: <https://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>**  
  
**Website: [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)**  
  
**Twitter: @NakedMormonism**  
  
**Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>**  
  
**Outro music by Jason Comeau: <http://aloststateofmind.com/>** **

Scathing Atheist

Mountain Meadows Massacre

146 - <http://scathingatheist.com/2015/12/03/episode-146-shownotes/>

147 - <http://scathingatheist.com/2015/12/10/episode-147-show-notes/>

Carthage Shootout

126 - <http://scathingatheist.com/2015/07/16/episode-126-show-notes/>

Skepticrat Podcast

<http://skepticrat.libsyn.com/>

God Awful Movies Podcast

<http://godawfulmovies.libsyn.com/>

Dogma Debate 24 hour Broadcastathon

<http://dogmadebate.com/ssa/>

Zachrilege Cast Episode 38

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hvXyr1c6gCI>

Welcome to Episode 25 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, I'm Bryce
Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me. It's been a little while, but
we're diving back into the easily accessible deep history of the LDS
church today, and it's gunna be a party. 

Last time that we were talking about our historical timeline, Ollie
Cowdung Oliver Cowdery, P-cubed Parley Parker Pratt, Dick Zyban
Peterson, and Peter Whitmer, all made a trip to the edge of the land of
the Lamanites. This took the missionary troop from New York, through
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and all the way to the very western edge of
Missouri. This was a trek of almost 1,100 miles, landing them in the
little border town of Independence, Missouri. They also picked up our
pal Freddy Willey, or Frederick G. Williams, on their way out to
Lamanite country. The beginning of this trip put the missionaries in
Mentor, Ohio, meeting with Hingepin Sidney Rigdon, and conducting a few
sermons to the congregations that followed Rigdon. Rigdon supposedly
converted to Mormonism at this time, as did a significant portion of his
flock, and it all came at the perfect time for Joe, and the early
church.

Joe was in a bit of a jam in New York. Everywhere that he went, his
reputation preceded him, and the locals would chase him out of town with
pitchforks, or threats of lynching. This was especially present in the
town of Colesville, New York, where the Knight family was living at the
time. There were a few other people in Colesville that converted to the
religion, but for the most part, the Knight family made up the majority
of the people there, and Joe was smart enough to ask his old pal Joseph
Knight Sr., to help him with a big project that was about to commence.

What project is that might you ask? Well, the first of many mass
exoduses of the Mormon church of course. This is a theme that seems to
run throughout many cults throughout history. The cult builds to a level
that the locals chase it out of wherever it's settled, and it's forced
to move or die. The same thing happened to the Mormon church multiple
times, and the first 2 months of 1831 marked the first of these many
exoduses that Joe's church went through before his death a mere 13 and a
half years after this. 

So, Joe went to Colesville for one whole day to ask Joseph Knight Sr to
move him and Emma out to Mentor, Ohio, which Knight consented to. Joe
also issued multiple commands telling the 3 church congregations
(Fayette, Palmyra, Colesville) that they needed to move out to Ohio with
Joe, or they would basically be cut off. From what we can tell, most of
the believing members fell in line behind the burgeoning cult leader
Joe, and moved out soon after Joe rolled into Kirtland. Or should I say,
sleighed into Kirtland, because it was in February of 1831.

Of course, as soon as Joe got to Kirtland Ohio, he found his target
family to latch onto, and dig his proboscis deep into their livelihood.
He began leeching off the Whitney family as soon as he arrived. The
Whitney family were somewhat wealthy store owners in Kirtland, and Joe,
along with the pregnant Emma, would live in the apartment above the
Whitney store for the next three years until the congregation built them
a house. The Whitney's were a couple slightly older than Joe and Emma,
and Joe just couldn't help himself to their hospitality enough. He
became so dependant on the Whitney family, that he began calling
Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "Mother Whitney". Thus, the parasitic
relationship that Joe was building with the Whitneys was made abundantly
clear with this little pet name, and would be further solidified through
its continued use.

After talking about Joe getting his suckers latched onto these suckers,
we talked about a woman that was recorded in Mormon history by the name
of Hubble who was revealing false prophecies. She was shut down by a
Joseph revelation or two, as was anybody else that ventured to grow
balls big enough to actually challenge the almighty Joe. 

Joe also established the idea of common wealth, and communism, in a town
that was already practicing it under the reign of Hingepin Sidney
Rigdon. Joe basically said that they had the right idea, but they were
calling it the wrong name, and the place where they put the common
wealth was supposed to be called 'The Bishop's Storehouse', instead of
whatever they called it. Of course, Joe chose no other place to have
this storehouse rectified, than the Whitney and Co., trading post at the
center of Kirtland. 

Last episode, I had said that the missionary force made their trip out
to Jackson County, MO, arrived back in Kirtland, OH sometime in March of
1831, but I was wrong, with the exception of P-cubed Parley P. Pratt.
The missionary force didn't make their way back to Kirtland, they just
remained in Missouri, in anticipation of what we'll talk about today.
That finished up the main historical portion of the last historical
timeline episode.

We finished out the rest of the episode by trying to parse out the
interaction between God, and Enoch contained in the Pearl of Great
Price, Book of Moses, Chapter 7. This was a crazy screed by God sending
Enoch on the hardest acid trip of ever, and I summed up the interaction
in the show notes of TLDR: God is a stupid dick, and Enoch is the best
magician the world has ever seen. That was pretty much it, and all of
that craziness sets us up for today's episode. Oh yeah, I forgot to
mention Edward Partridge. That was the guy that Joe parasitically used
to hold him over until he penetrated the hearts of the Whitney family.
Eddy Party-Boy Partridge became the first Bishop in the church in Ohio,
thus controlling the bishop's storehouse.

To start us out today, we need to discuss a pattern that is seen in the
evolution of religions throughout antiquity. It's the same pattern that
plagues ideas in general, but religions are the most prevalent analogue
to what we'll be studying today, and there are thousands we can examine
throughout history, to provide said analogue.

Let's just take the Abrahamic religions for a second. You have the
religion of the Hebrews that arose from the war God Raham, that existed
among a myriad other actively worshipped gods in the surrounding areas.
Even the flood myth of Noah was arguably sourced from the Epic of
Gilgamesh down to the length of the arc and the number of animals
aboard, so all the Abrahamic religions are actually Gilgamec at heart.
Well, likely, people that were following the ancient Sumerian Gilgamesh
religion had to break off at some point where a difference of ideas came
along, or a divergence in geography, or any number of small sticking
points. Of course, what we're talking about right now is majorly
simplified for the sake of storytelling. Anyway, the Jews had to break
off from some other religion/god claim, in order to balconize into their
own tribe, lead by the mythical men Abraham, all the way down to Moses.
The Rabbinic Jewish religion, or just ancient Hebrews that followed the
Hebraic holy texts were a successful, and continually persecuted
religious sect until the idea of a Jewish Rabbi carpenter was circulated
through 2<sup>nd</sup> century Greco-Jewish Isreal, and the surrounding
areas, and thus came the birth of Christianity.

The idea of Jesus was copied and passed around through generations of
people, and evolved into hundreds, possibly thousands of different
religious sects, that were arguing, bickoring, and all out warring with
each other about who was right concerning small pieces of doctrine.
Should men be circumsized? Should you be baptized, and how? Are you
saved by faith alone, or are works necessary for salvation? What did
Jesus say on the cross before he died? Was Jesus God? Was Jesus the Son
of God? Was Jesus some random piece of the trifecta of God Pie even
though he was actually the whole pie all along? 

Among all this religious strife and confusion came Emperor Constantine
the Great, and his mother, and sparing some of the finer details, they
established Nazareth as a real place, and created the Roman Catholic
religion. Like I said earlier, there is a lot more nuance and detail
that I'm leaving out for the sake of storytelling, or drawing an analogy
here, so if you want to know a lot more about the thousands of years
that I'm covering right now, this is clearly the wrong podcast to find
that information.

At the fall of the Roman Empire, the Catholic church was the best set of
rules and governance to step into the massive void that this huge
empiric collapse created, and it did just that. Through war and
inquisitions, and just out of sheer need, the Roman Catholic church
became a world superpower, acting as a shadow government, where
leadership could be bought and sold. 

At some point in the 7<sup>th</sup> century, somebody was fed up enough
with the Catholic church, and it's doctrines, and they brought forth the
Holy Quran. It was picked up by the warlord Muhammed who claimed himself
to be a prophet, albeit a misogynistic childfucker with multiple wives,
much like Joseph Smith. There were multiple evolutions and schisms from
the original Quranic text from which were born the Hadifs, and warring
factions of Muslims have been killing each other ever since. I suppose
that's what happens when your original prophet is a warlord, you tend to
favor war, over reason.

Of course, Muslims differ greatly on their perspective of Jesus, as
opposed to Christians, calling him a minor prophet, second in command to
Muhammed. And of course, all of this is a major divergence in what Jews
consider Jesus, a mere heretic at worst, or an inspired Rabbi at best.
The evolution of some of the major world religions continues in an ever
changing dynamic. Fast forward a mere 870 years to the protestant
reformation, under the banner of the Augustinian friar, Martin Luther's
95 thesis that he supposedly nailed to the door of the Wittenberg
Catholic church, even though that story has little foundation in truth.
Luther had a major disagreement with the church selling indulgences, and
the church had a major disagreement with Luther regarding his addition
to Romans 3:28 of faith 'alone' being necessary for salvation.

Luther wrote his famous catechisms, imparting his nuanced knowledge of
the bible and church doctrine to the masses, thanks to the advent of the
printing press, and was considered a vicious heretic for his teachings.
Martin Luther had an understanding of Christianity that was evolved from
the standard Roman Catholic version of Christianity, and his writings
have a large influence on discussion topics in a lot of different
churches even today.

Fast forward another 300 years, and here we introduce Joseph Smith.
We've talked extensively about the religious soup that the Book of
Mormon evolved from, and we can trace it's origins, much like any living
organism can be traced back to it's evolutionary ancestors. Joseph had
his own ideas about Christianity, and he brought a lot of absurd new
ideas to the table in his later years. Simply in regards to the BoM,
Joseph was able to come to a lot of nuanced conclusions about what
church should really be, or his own doctrine of the trinity, or about
Jesus appearing in resurrected form to the Native Americans, or about
salvation by faith alone, or dealing with hell, or any number of other
challenging topics of Christianity that have inspired discussion,
disagreement, or all-out war throughout history.

Joseph evolved his own offshoot of Christianity, and even in his own
lifetime, he evolved his own ideas about Jesus, and god, and they
continually changed. The book of Mormon is written from a trinitarian
understanding of God, whereas everything in Mormonism after that is
Modulism, which eventually turned into this idea of an infinite regress
of gods, ruling over the countless stars and planets in the night sky. 

Alright, that was a greatly acclerated perspective of the last 4000
years of human religiousity, but the one main point I'm trying to get at
is evolution. All of these religions we've discussed so far came from a
religion that existed previous to it, and they changed through the
process of evolution of a meme. Even the Sumerian Gilgamecs probably
descended from some other religious oral tradition that there's no
written record of, but that's something we will never know for sure. If
you want to be enlightened about the Gilgamecs, listen to the Angry
Liberal Atheists podcast. The guys over there read the Epic of
Gligamesh, and it's endlessly fascinating to draw the parallels between
it and plenty of other religions that may have sprang from Gilgamec
loins. 

This evolution of the meme of religion is a point that I don't think can
be emphasized enough. We've spent these first few minutes talking about
a macro scale of religious evolution, but the thing about the theory of
evolution is it's scalability. If we think back to the interview I had
with Rachel Nanon Brown, she was able to draw the distinction between
micro, and macro-evolution, but it's still the same idea, just viewed on
a scale of single generations, as opposed to millions of years
respectively. No matter what scale you look at, the theory of evolution
holds on a macro, and a micro scale, the only difference is the amount
of time within the scope of research.

So, let's see if the theory for the macro-evolution of the religion
meme, holds on a micro scale. We've seen this evolution of religion over
the course of thousands of years of recorded history, but for the theory
to hold, we need to see it manifest on a smaller scale. 

Last episode we talked about a woman named Hubble, and we briefly
mentioned her in the wrap up of this episode. With a few hours of
research, I was unable to find any of her writings, or even her first
name, but we can be sure that she was considered a heretic by Joseph
Smith for producing divine revelation that was contrary to what Joe was
teaching at the time. As far as we can tell, she was cast out as a
heretic, but let's take a step back for a minute.

I would make the argument that Joe was the new meme on the block. We
know that was the case, because he was unique enough to call himself a
prophet, but let's dive into it further and see what we can unearth. 

The way any given population functions is growth, and expansion.
Homo-Sapien has been growing and expanding for a couple hundred thousand
years at most, and homonids have been around for about 7 million years
beyond that. Once a population gets to a certain point, something in
that population has to change, in order to adapt and expand. Our
ancestors were tree dwellers for millions of years prior to bi-pedal
mobility. As they moved to the sahara of the African plains, they needed
to become more upright and bi-pedal in order to move to more distant
areas, and obtain more resources for further growth. 

Take, for example, that thing where you're asleep and you jerk awake.
Most people have done this at some point, but you're just about to fall
asleep, dreaming about walking along a ledge, or flying, or just walking
on the street, and you feel like you lose your sense of balance and
fall, making your body jerk awake, with vivid memory of what had just
happened in the dream. Well, that's called a hipnic jerk. It's a
vestigial feature from our tree dwelling ancestors. When our ancestors
were sleeping on treebranches, and they began to fall during their
slumber, selection tended to favor the apes that could wake up and react
quickly, as opposed to those who continued to sleep, that just fell out
of the tree, and became hurt, or died by something that was trying to
eat them on the ground below the tree. Well, when a person's sense of
equilibrium undergoes a chemical change during sleep, the neuro-chemical
differences that happen, activate the hipnagogic reaction, and causes
the person to suddenly wake up, often times startled with a jerk. 

I remember this happening to me once, and to this day, it sticks firmly
in my mind. I was riding in the shell-covered back of a pickup truck,
headed into southern Utah on a camping trip. It was hot in the back of
the pickup, but I was laying down on the carpeted floor in the bed of
the pickup. The steady motion of the truck climbing up the dirt road,
coupled with the heat, lulled me into a sleepy trance, with my mind
still very awake. I dreamt that I was running around a swimming pool. I
remember seeing the marble underneath my feet as I made lap after lap of
this swimming pool, trying to catch the person I was chasing, and just
as I was within arms reach, I stepped in a wet patch on the slick marble
floor, and fell. I jumped awake just as my head was about to smash
against the ground, and my sister and friends looked at me with surprise
on their faces. My guess was that they probably watched a fairly violent
jump, and were about to make fun of me for it. All I could think to say
through drowzy, closed eyes was, "What, I slipped and fell, leave me
alone", unleashing a torrent of laughter from everybody. It was a very
dramatic physical reaction that I had no conscious control over it, but
I still remember it to this day, 15 years later. 

I had experienced the same feeling my quadrapedal ancestors felt
millions of years ago when they were about to fall out of a tree to
their death during sleep. The apes that were my ancestors merely evolved
the ability to suddenly wake up when that falling started to happen, and
saved themselves from falling to a painful death.

The reason I relay that story is to draw the connection of a
macro-evolutionary trait, something that has evolved over millions of
years, as opposed to eye color, hair color, skin tone, and other small
mutations that happen on the micro scale of evolution over two or three
generations.

Alright, why did I digress so much there? Well, I'm trying to draw the
connection between macro-evolution, and micro-evolution in memes, and
genes in any given society. Macro happens on a large scale across
hundreds of thousands, or millions of years, whereas micro-evolutionary
mutations happen from one generation to the next. This change over time
happens with genes, so let's examine this drifting effect on memes, or
the behaviors of society in general. 

We've briefly discussed how religions evolve on a considerably macro
scale throughout the past 4000 years of recorded history. Of course, we
looked at a very VERY simplified version of this evolution, but it still
serves the purposes of our examination today. So let's talk about Joe
and his own evolved version of Protestant Christianity, descended from
Abrahamic traditions, which possibly has roots in the ancient Sumerain
Gilgamec religion.

There really isn't one time that we can point to where Mormonism began.
We can look at the date of the first congregation April 6, 1830, but the
ideas of Joe's Church of Christ had been bouncing around inside Joe's
skull for years leading up to that. He claimed as early as 1823 that he
had been visited by an angel that would instruct him on attaining the
plates, which were an ancient record of the inhabitants of the Amercian
continent. I would argue that it was during this time that Joe was
slowly formulating his own thoughts and ideas about what his church
would be like, even if he hadn't planned on starting a church this early
on. 

In previous episodes, I've provided the scenario of Joe attending
religious revivals throughout the burned over district, and he must have
watched the collection basket fill up with money at the end of each
revival, and envyed the person that all that money was going to. He was
probably smart enough to pick up on the triggers that people liked
hearing the most, or caught the most attention. Remember, at this time,
the Catholic church didn't have a foothold in American culture, the way
it had in Europe. Christianity was spreading to a whole new part of the
world, adapting and changing, and slowly morphing as it was gaining new
resources, consuming new souls, and adapting to new ideas.

As Mormonism was growing in 1831, and the Mormonites were becoming more
populous and common in multiple areas, the church had to develop and
change, or possibly be lost to the obscure annals of 19<sup>th</sup>
century history, like the Millerites, or Campbellites.

Some of the doctrines changed dramatically, fundamentally shifting from
one polar claim to the other. Some of the doctrines were merely modified
to suit a given situation. 

One of these polar opposite distinctions that drove a very large wedge
between Joe and Ollie Cowdung Allover Cowdery, was the church's stance
on priestcraft. We've covered this before, but as a refresher,
priestcraft is basically the idea of paying clergy for their church
duties. When the BoM was being written, Ollie and Joe were a united
front on this issue, because it probably drew a lot of applause or
appreciation by the crowds at the religious revivals Ollie and Joe were
attending. Nobody liked the idea of having a rich church, because a lot
of those people had recently escaped the clutches of the great and
abominable church in Europe. Once the Mormon church was actually
organized, and Joe's direct revelations began to supercede the doctrinal
claims in the BoM, Ollie, and probably many other members of the church
began to have a bit of a problem. This was one of the first doctrinal
changes that caused a lot of people to question if Joe was indeed the
one true prophet of God, or if God merely used him as a tool to bring
forth the BoM, and maybe the church should be led by Ollie, or somebody
more prophet-like than Joe, preferably somebody that didn't come up with
contradicting revelations mere months after the BoM was published. 

Joe began to feel the pressures of running a church, and started to
understand how expensive it can get, so he did something about it. He
came up with a string of revelations that made priestcraft totally okay,
bro\! In fact, he provided direct revelations that He and Emma would be
supported by the church, and that Joe would have "no strength for
physical labor". One of Joe's first revelations when he rolled into
Kirtland in February 1831, was for the saints to build him a house to
live in, and that all the possessions in the Whitney general store would
be absorbed by the church, and be called the bishops storehouse. 

The bishops storehouse was basically the idea of theocratic communism,
one might say fascism, where all the possessions of the commune are
gathered, and those resources are diveyed out to the people, living
inside the commune, the way the leadership sees fit. So, if you weren't
following the church exactly the way Joe intended, or dictated, you
would be cut off from supplies until you either fell into compliance, or
just left. The church still practices the doctrine of the bishop's
storehouse even today, they just don't take from their members to supply
it, except 10% in tithing, of course. They use their hundreds of
thousands of acres of farm land to supply it instead.

Well, Joe had to use divine revelations to solve any problems or
quabbles that did happen in the church, and he wasn't really shy about
it. In march of 1831 he revealed what's contained in the Book of
Commandments chapter 48. There is a lot of useless preaching that is so
boring and repetitive throughout the BoC, but there are a few operative
verses in the chapter. One of those is verse 59, but we'll read a couple
verses before and after to get a proper understanding of it.

This is the BoC 48:56-61

"56: For verily I say unto you, that great things await you;

57: Ye hear of wars in foreign lands, but behold I say unto you they are
nigh even unto your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of
wars in your own lands.

58: Wherefore I the Lord have said gather ye out from the eastern lands,
assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my church;

59: Go ye forth into the western countries, call upon the inhabitants to
repent, and inasmuch as they do repent, build up churches unto me; and
with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may
purchase an inheritence which shall hereafter be appointed unto you, and
it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge,
a place of safety for the saints of the most high God;

60: And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord
also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it;

61: And it shall be called Zion;"

Alright, so the verse we needed to primarily focus on there was verse 59
when the revelation told the saints to gather up their riches to
purchase an inheritence, basically to build churches in the western
countries, only after calling the Native Americans to repentance. This
was the next stab that Joe took at trying to proselyte to the Natives,
now that the first missionary force had failed to fully accomplish it's
given task.

Remember back to the last historical episode, Ollie, P-cubed, Dick
Zyban, Peter Whitmer, and Freddy Willey all attempted to spread the good
word to the Native American settlements that were just west of
Independence, MO. They tried, but were kicked out by some of the Natives
they were trying to call to repentance in the first place. After this
first failed attempt, Ollie wrote a letter to General William Clark, who
was head of U.S. Indian affairs in 1830. Of course, Richard Cummins, an
"anti-Mormon" wrote a letter to Clark at the same time, discouraging him
from allowing these crazy Mormons to proselyte to the Natives, which was
probably well advised.

The missionary force remained in Zion, where they took up semi-permanent
residence, and you have to wonder what the feelings between Ollie and
Joe were at this time. 

What I mean is, Joe and Ollie had been locking horns a few times up to
this point, concerning small doctrinal issues. The biggest source of
contention between them had been the whole idea of the prophet being
financially sustained by the church. Ollie thought it was in direct
violation of the Book of Mormon, and God's command in general, but Joe
was a little more liberal on that tenant of doctrine. Joe had just
commanded Ollie and friends to go on this missionary campaign, that had
very little success. He had commanded it by way of divine revelation
from God, yet the mission was almost entirely a failure, which almost
implicitly creates contradictions with the almighty god claim, but we
can ignore that when we posit the claim that Joe simply revealed it out
of his own head. But still, Joe had been playing king of the hill all by
himself since he sent Ollie away. Ollie was his only friend that had the
balls to actually challenge what Joe would say, and his ever important
role of devil's advocate was gone, leaving Joe completely unbridled, and
an unabashed theocrat in it's infantile stages. Then, Joe moved out to
Kirtland, while Ollie and friends were still out in BFE Missouri, in an
effort to expand his ever growing empire, and bring more people and
resources under his control.

Within the first week that Joe arrived in Kirtland, he had absorbed the
Whitney general store, and was best buddies with Hingepin Sidney Rigdon.
Joe had commanded the people to give tithes, and build him a house, and
had latched onto a few of the more affluent people in the town, to
parasitically leech his living off of. Emma was his queen, and the
Whitney's had become his unpayed servants, while he ate their food, and
slept in their warm beds.

There had been a few dissenters in the Mentor/Kirtland area that had
been utterly squashed or chased off by Joe or Rigdon, but for the most
part, the people listened to what Joe had to say, because Rigdon trusted
Joe, and the people trusted Rigdon. If Joe was playing big king on the
block in New York and Pennsylvania, he was playing king of the whole
fuckin world once he got to Ohio. 

Now, picture yourself in Ollie's shoes. The last time Ollie and Joe had
spoken with each other was during a spat about how the church shouldn't
be used to support Joe and Emma, and it was probably a very heated fight
between these childhood friends. While Ollie was on this mission that
Joe sent him on, Joe had established himself as holy Mormon pope king
badass mutherfucker, establishing a religious commune under his almighty
power of revelation from the almighty God of the universe. 

What would you think if you were Ollie? How would you really feel after
having these fights over and over with Joe, and then come to find out
that Joe went so far the other direction, which came into strong
opposition to your sincerely held beliefs? Once again, I kind of feel
bad for Ollie when I step into his shoes. Joe just keeps fucking him,
and he didn't even care. Joe was completely unapologetic about how much
of an unappreciative fucking he was giving Ollie, and I would wager to
say that having Rigdon on his side, made Joe even more secure in his
manufactured false position of power. 

Consider all of these electric emotions that must have been arcing
between Joe and Ollie, and then include in your consideration the
revelation we just read that was given in March of 1831, while Ollie and
team were in Missouri. Joe basically used all of the hard work they had
been doing in service to the Church of Christ, and employed it as a
springboard to ask for more money, and volunteers, to go proselyte to
the Lamanites, call them to repentance, and establish Zion, the New
Jerusalem on the borders of the Lamanites. We have no record of a single
thank you from Joe to Ollie, but I doubt we would even expect to find
one, given the disagreements plaguing their friendship.

Well, Joe used the interrum time from March to June, to collect money
and goods for the church, and appoint a new historian and scribe. From
the time that Joe and Ollie had teamed up, Joe had been the main guy,
and Ollie had been the scribe. That was a power dynamic that Joe had
loosely established very early on, and any time Ollie tried to
circumvent that dynamic, and elevate himself to a level equal with Joe,
the insurrection was always quelled by new revelations. Take, for
example, the BoC chapter 50. It's a perfect example of Joe making
Ollie's role less and less significant in the church, in a effort to
slowly squeeze him out of any powerful role in the church.

"Behold, it is expedient in me that my servant John should write and
keep a regular history, and assist you, my servant Joseph, in
transcribing all things which shall be given unto you."

Verse 3 continues:

"And again I say unto you, that it shall be appointed unto him to keep
the church record and history continually, for Oliver I have appointed
to another office"

That revelation appointed our buddy John Whitmer as the new scribe and
historian of the church, removing a huge responsibility from Ollie's
shoulders. You might think, oh, well, at least Ollie had some other
commitment or office to take care of in the church, well, I can't for
the life of me figure out what that was. Before this, Ollie was
responsible for being Joe's right hand man, documenting every single
crazy thing that fell out of Joe's fucked up religious zealot-crazed
skull, and Joe took that responsibility away from Ollie. In November
Ollie is given a task, but we'll get to the details of that in a minute
here. We still need to cover what happened leading up to November.

In May of 1831, Joe gave this revelation contained in the BoC chapter
53, it was obviously a reaction to somebody preaching false doctrine,
and it's not very thinly veiled. This is 53:1-6

"Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to the voice of the
living God; and attend to the words of wisdom which shall be given unto
you, according as ye have asked and are agreed as touching the church,
and the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth.

2: Behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which are
false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world;

3: And also satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow
you.

4: Behold I the Lord have looked upon you, and have seen abominations in
the church, which profess my name;

5: But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or
in death, for they shall inherit eternal life.

6: But wo unto them that are deceivers, and hypocrites, for thus saith
the Lord, I will bring them to judgment."

At some point I'm going to stop pointing these out, because so much of
the Book of Commandments is just chastizing anybody that preaches false
doctrine, or claims the power of prophecy in some way. This has happened
so many times times, and we've only covered a small fraction of all of
the verses in the BoC that are similar to this. Remember Hubble, the
woman that falsly claimed the power of revelation? Remember Hiram Page a
year before this? He revealed the location of Zion, and Joe came up with
a revelation that said Hiram was lead by Satan, and was preaching false
doctrine. There have been multiple examples of this happening, and like
I said, we've only covered a small fraction of them all, and there is
probably only a small fraction of these recorded in the history or BoC,
in comparison to how many small schisms were actually happening. There
were probably people contradicting Joe all the time that we will never
know about from any legitimate church, or secular source. There are
probably accounts of Joe being a tyrannical asshole in personal journals
and newspaper publications, but I haven't found a whole lot to get a
realistic idea of how much of an anthropormorphic Iron fist Joe was,
outside of official church publications anyway.

That being said, we'll probably stop covering these schisms in so much
detail, but I do want to pause and draw a circle around this for a
minute. We started out this episode discussing how religions grow and
change over time and geography. It seems like a church grows and expands
to a point where it can no longer function as a single entity, and then
there is a breakoff or schism, that forces the original church to either
change, or excise the dissenters. Well, Joe's church was doing the same
thing. It was growing and expanding, and including more and more people
with more diverse ideas, and perspectives of what Christianity is
supposed to be. 

When somebody that was part of the church would have a disagreement with
some point of doctrine, or a new revelation that Joe gave, Joe would
react in a way that would create an 'us', forcing the person that
disagreed to be part of the 'them'. These people would either ignore the
cognitive dissonance, and continue following Joe, or they would continue
to fight, and be pushed away with the label of apostate, infidel, or
just lead astray by Satan. These schisms happened countless times in
Joe's church, on a macro, and a micro level. Some of these forced people
like Doctor Philastus Hurlbut to go do a bunch of research, and help
publish a book labeled as 'anti-Mormon'. Some of these schisms forced
prominent leaders to break away, and start their own religion. Some
caused people to be ex-communicated, or like in Ollie's case, leave, and
then come back after Joe died in the Carthage shootout. 

Take for another example a man named Wycam Clark. In Spring of 1831,
him, along with Northrop Sweet, and four others apostatized. Wycam
called himself the one true revelator, and prophet of God, and they
began the "Pure Church of Christ". This constitutes the first official
offshoot church that descended directly from Joseph Smith's Latter-day
Saint movement, and it was all due to a small disagreement between Joe,
and the 6 people that organized this new church. From what we can tell,
they had a few meetings, but soon disbanded, and weren't really heard
from again. The Pure Church of Christ's status today is wholly defunct,
and has no presence anywhere, except in history books.

This example just highlights the ebb and flow of a church with any given
doctrine. It's happened for thousands of years with every major religion
on a large and small scale, and it happened with Mormonism in it's early
days, even up to today. If you follow Mormon headlines, you'll know that
there was recently a mass exodus of church members held just outside
temple square. Over 1500 people that have their records on the church
logbooks, gathered in Salt Lake City, and sent in their resignation
letters, all in response to the church's stance on the family structure
of gays. Personally I say good, but I'm also kind of conflicted about
it. Since these people split, there has been a bit of an influx of new
members into churches that have split off of the main SLC Mormonism, but
still hold some parts of the church as true. If you don't know what I'm
referring to, do a google search for churchistrue (all one word), or new
Mormonism, or Mormonism 2.0, or church caffienated. There have been
dozens of breakoffs that have absorbed these people coming out of the
one true church, SLC Mormonism.

One might say that these people probably can't live without a
church-like structure to underpin their entire lives, so it's
understandable and acceptable that they left the SLC Mormonism, only to
join a breakoff faction that resulted from a schism in church doctrine.
But I just can't get on board with that. How far can the sweater
unravel, and still protect you from the buffettings of the real world,
before it's serving as nothing but a useless label. I call myself a
cultural Mormon, much like a person that grew up Jewish calls themselves
a cultural Jew, but nothing about the church informs my perspective of
reality anymore. Nor do I feel like any part of the church protects me
from the buffettings of the world. If the entire facade falls, and it's
foundation is built on a mountain of steaming bullshit, it's a cancerous
entity that needs to be done away with as a whole. We shouldn't be
keeping some of it, and getting rid of other parts of it, let's just
swear off the Mormon religion, and leave it to rot in the annals of
history.

I understand that the church is great for family structure, and keeping
people away from alcohol, and promiscuity, but at what cost? How much
psychological damage can we allow before the net positive that the
church provides, is overshadowed by the overwhelming problems of
depression, anxiety, self-loathing, sexual frustration or confusion,
fracturing of families, disconnection from reality, and overpowering
us-vs-them mentaltiy? How long does the church get a free ride of
fucking with people's minds before we finally say enough and call *IT
*to repentance for the damage it's done? We can't just say I don't like
what the church says about blacks, or gays, or alcohol, or tatoos, so
I'm going to run to a different church that still believes in the Book
of Mormon, but isn't allowed to tax me 10% of my income to fund
multi-billion dollar shopping malls, media conglomerations, or insurance
angencies. We can't just pick and chose what we do and don't like about
the church, and still call ourselves members of that church, because by
the church's standards, we are no longer true believers, and we're
treated as such. 

Look, every possible good that any church offers, can be attained
through secular means. The church may have an amazing sense of
community, and it may provide a lattice type structure for a family to
grow up using for support, but all of the negatives associated with the
church, constitutes a net negative on society in general.

No doubt, there are a lot of benefits to having a group of like minded
individuals to spend time with or lean on when times get hard, I get
that. A lot of studies have been conducted looking at the mental and
social benefits of being part of a group where you're accepted for who
you are, and lo and behold, the people that are part of a society, tend
to be better off, or happier in some way, or have a slightly better
quality of life. We're a social species, so it's understandable that we
are better off when we are involved in a social group. There are a lot
of people who join churches and their life completely turns around for
the better. Some people I speak with on a regular basis credit the
church with saving their life, and they say that there's no possible way
that it could have done that, unless it were true. But I would make the
argument that the effect the church has on any given individual, has
absolutely nothing to do with how true or false the church is. 

I heard this example on the diatribe of episode 140 of the Scathing
Atheist, and I would recommend checking it out, because the host does a
fantastic job of constructing an analogy that deals with the social
benefits of a religion, and how that has nothing to do with how true or
false the religion is.

To be honest, one of my favorite podcasts is The Scathing Atheist, and
one of the main reasons for that, is the diatribe at the beginning of
each episode. Noah Lugeons does a fantastic job of deconstructing, or
offering a unique perspective on some large topic inside atheism. His
diatribe at the beginning of episode 140 is one of my favorite diatribes
ever, and it plays perfectly into what I've been eluding to for the last
few minutes. Noah makes his point much better than I can, so I'm just
going to let him speak for himself. This clip is used with his explicit
permission, and I'll admit, I've listened to it almost a dozen times,
and I pull something new from it each time I hear it. Feel free to
rewind and listen to it a few times, like I did, to get as much out of
the screed as it has to offer. Sometimes I need the repitition to get
all the words because they're spoken so damn fast, but it's done simply
perfectly, and I think the diatribes are a huge asset to the
Atheist/humanist community.

Insert Diatribe 140 2:57-8:36

Thank you Noah for allowing me to use that clip, and for making the
larger point so succinctly. Also, thank you for having me on to talk
about the Mountain Meadows Massacre, and the Carthage Jail shootout. If
you haven't heard those episodes, I'll leave links to them in the show
notes, they were a lot of fun, and Noah does a great job of conducting
the interviews. If you haven't already, you should really check out the
shows put out by the Scathing Atheist crew. Skepticrat, their political
show, Scathing Atheist, their athiest headlines show, and of course, God
Awful Movies, their insane religious movie review show, which is making
quite the splash lately. Anyway, back to the larger point.

Noah said it so well. If we examine the positives that religion has to
offer, they are overshadowed by all the negatives that go along with it,
it's a package deal. The Mormon religion offers a very strong community,
and family centered structure to raise children in, and those positives
can't be ignored. But all the other shit that the church also includes
in their teachings, poison the well. We can see the benefits of a social
species, being part of a society, but joining the Mormon church also has
the extra baggage of the Book of Mormon, and the history of the church,
and inciting mental illness at multiple levels, in multiple different
ways. The secular analogue, that doesn't have all this extra bullshit to
overcome, is definitionally better. The negatives of the church so
outweigh any positives that it offers, and that overall negative renders
the whole Mormon religion as nothing but a parasite on society. Add in
the multi-level marketting, and iron-clad tithing structure, and you're
looking at a well organized, well managed multi-billion dollar pyramid
scheme, founded on modern-day slave labor. How can a person possibly
make the argument that the Mormon church is a good thing in light of all
this? How can people say, well, the SLC Mormonism, is wrong, but the
church is right, and the Book of Mormon is true, so we just follow it
anyway? That makes you compliant with all the damage that the church has
done, and currently does to it's members, and society in general.

Anybody that supports the catholic church with attendance or tithes is
at some level responsible for that world-wide child rape syndicate that
is headquartered in it's own nation-state, making it above any national,
or international laws. Every single catholic that supports a criminal
organization with billions of dollars in assets, that shuffles
child-molesting preists around, is copeable at some level for allowing
that to happen, and giving money and attendance to that organization.

The same copeability applies to anybody that is a member of the Mormon
church at any level. Even if they say, we aren't a member of the SLC
Mormon church, we just believe the Book of Mormon to be true, and we're
just cultural Mormons so we keep going to church, at some level they
have dirty blood-money on their folded hands, and they refuse to see the
bigger problem, which is the church itself.

All of this to say, we don't need the church to be good people. We've
watched the Mormon religion change and adapt to new social pressures.
We've seen people breakoff from the mainstream Mormon religion, and
start their own religion, sticking with some of the teachings, and
ignoring others. I'm arguing that we, as a species, have evolved past
the need for superstition. We don't need the church anymore. We need a
community to grow and develop in, don't get me wrong on that. But, like
Noah said in his diatribe, the secular analogue to these church
communities can't help but be better, because it doesn't come in the
package deal with all the superstition, and other baggage that the
Mormon church has to deal with, and that's the larger point I'm getting
at.

The people that were members of the church that had some kind of
disagreement with Joe, either dealt with the problems, and suppressed
their own sense of cognitive dissonance, or they just broke completely
off, and joined up with some other religious sect, or went completely
awol, or were excommunicated, and ended up starting their own church.
With everything that was happening between Joe and Ollie during 1831,
it's really hard to try and understand why Ollie didn't do just that.
Ollie was arguably more of a preacher than Joe was. He probably didn't
have the imagination that Joe did, but he could sure rile up a crowd,
and he knew how to sell the Mormon product. Why didn't he just break off
and start up his own church based on the Book of Mormon? The world may
never know...

The next 7 months from late May to December 1831 involve some of the
most horrible backstabbings delivered to Ollie, all orchestrated by Joe.
The worst part is, Ollie just takes it, from what we can tell. First
off, Joe apparently wasn't satisfied by the mission trip out to
Independence, so he makes a trip for himself. Sometimes, when you want
something done right, you just have to do it yourself, and Joe finally
got off his lazy fuckin duffer and made the 800 mile/1300 km journey out
to the very western edge of European settlements. 

In June of 1831, Joe gave this revelation contained in the BoC chapter
54

"Behold, thus saith the Lord unto the elders whom he hath called and
chosen, in these last days, by the voice of his Spirit, saying, I the
Lord will make known unto you what I will that ye shall do from this
time until the next conference, which shall be held in Missouri, upon
the land which I will consecrate unto my people, which are a remnant of
Jacob, and them who are heirs according to the covenant.

2: Wherefore, verily I say unto you, let my servants Joseph and Sidney
take their journey as soon as preparations can be made to leave their
homes, and journey to the land of Missouri."

Joe had been forced into not-fucking-around mode, which is something
we'll close the episode on, and he was ready to expand the church to
include Zion the New Jerusalem. So, Joe and Hingepin Rigdon set out for
Independence themselves, to see what was there, and why Ollie and
company had failed so miserably in their mission. But before they could
leave, later on in that same chapter of the BoC, Joe established the
entire missionary force in the early church. Up to this point there had
been a few proselyting missions to a few places, but no substantial push
had been made to really bring in the new converts, so let's talk about
it.

I could read this out of the BoC, but it doesn't have everybody's last
names, so I'll read it out of D\&C section 52, just for ease of reading.

D\&C 52

"7: And again, Verily I say unto you, let my servant Lyman Wight and my
servant John Corrill take their journey speedily;

8: And also my servant John Murdock, and my servant Hyrum Smith, take
their journey unto the same place by the way of Detroit.

9: And let them journey from thence preaching the word by the way,
saying none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have
written, and that which is taught them by the comforter through the
prayer of faith.

Continuing on to verse 22

22: And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Thomas B. Marsh and
my servant Ezra Thayre take their journey also, preaching the word by
the way unto this same land.

23: And again let my servant Isaac morley and my servant Ezra Booth take
their journey, also preaching the word by the way unto this same land.

24: And again, let my servants Edward (Party-boy) Partridge and
Not-So-Smarty-Marty Harris take their journey with my servants Hingepin
Sidney Rigdon and Joe Smith Jr.

25: Let my servants P-cubed Parley P. Pratt and Orson (Brain-Power)
Pratt take their journey, and preach by the way even unto this same
land.

27: And let my servants Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter also take
their Journey unto this same land, and preach by the way."

And it goes on and on and on and on like that. I know that was a lot of
names, so do you see now why we throw the nicknames onto anybody that is
important to our storyline? Don't you worry dear listener. When any of
those listed people really distinguish themselves, we'll give them a
proper NaMo nickname, but for now, they're just a bunch of faceless
names headed out in pairs to spread the good word about the church. The
rest of that section just details some of the leadership roles and
offices of some of the other people that will run the church in the
absence of Joe, Rigdon, and all of these missionaries. But, we'll just
wait until David Michael and I get there on the MyBoM podcast to really
discuss them. All that we need to ascertain from that section in the
BoC/D\&C is that Joe sent out a huge missionary force, and left
Kirtland, along with Hingepin Rigdon, NSSM, and Party-Boy Partridge,
headed for Independence, MO. 

Before we talk about the journey out to MO, and the relative success
they had, we need to talk about the Melchizedek Priesthood. Until this
point, it has never been mentioned in the official history of the
church. The M priesthood made an appearance in the D\&C, but it was only
added later. The same passage that mentions the MP in the D\&C, is
basically absent in the original BoC that was published 2 years before
the first copy of the D\&C was published. So, the term MP is
anachronistic in this respect. Here, on June 3<sup>rd</sup> of 1831, 2
years after the church claims the MP existed, the first mention of it
makes it's way into the official History of the Church, Vol 1:175-176.
Now, this is kind of fun, because the publication of the History of the
Church that I'm reading from was printed in 1980, last edited in 1951 by
George Albert Smith. What's fun about this version specifically, is the
footnotes. As far as I'm aware, the actual 7 volume History of the
Church is fairly unchanged by later edits. It's funny how the Book of
Mormon or the D\&C can be changed and edited, but the actual history of
the church, dictated by Joe in 1838, isn't subject to these same edits.
Anyway, what we do find, is footnotes with the Mormon apologetics for
what's contained in the History of the Church volumes.

When I was reading about Joe and Ollie getting the priesthood in May of
1829, I remember finding it odd that they were given the holy priesthood
of Aaron, but there is absolutely no mention of the MP, which is the
step above the Aaronic Priesthood. The MP is supposedly necessary for
running the church, and for confirming people as members of the church,
but Joe didn't really mention it until a year in to church operations,
and this June 1831 conference is when it comes up. The Mormon apologetic
in the footnote is fantastic in it's efforts to justify this
discrepancy, so I'm just going to read the passage out of the History of
the church Vol. 1:175-176, and then we'll cover the apologetics attached
to it. For any never-mos out there, this may seem very trivial, and
ridiculous to spend any amount of time on, but to my fellow ex-mos, you
know how much of a problem this creates. Joe operated the church for an
entire year without having the MP. That is absolutely insane in my mind,
and hopefully my fellow ex-mos share my same surprise about the
situation.

History of the Church 1:175-176

"On the 3<sup>rd</sup> of June, the Elders from the various parts of the
country where they were laboring, came in; and the conference before
appointed, convened in Kirtland; and the Lord displayed His power to the
most perfect satisfaction of the Saints. The man of sin was revealed,
and the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood was manifested and
conferred for the first time upon several of the Elders."

That was the first appearance of the MP in the entire history, of the
entire church. In the original BoC, it hadn't been mentioned before
this, no journal entries talked about it, no letters from church leaders
ever mention it. This is the first account of the MP in Joe's church.
This is a glaring discrepancy that we need to address. So, let's see
what the apologetic has to say about it in the footnotes of the History
of the Church that I'm reading from.

"A misapprehension has arisen in the minds of some respecting the
statement – "The authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood was manisfested
and conferred for the first time upon several of the Elders." It has
been supposed that this passage meant that the higher or MP was now for
the first time conferred upon men in this dispensation. This of course
is an error, since even before the Church was organized, the
Apostleship, the highest authority in the Melchizedek Priesthood, was
conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and very probably upon
David Whitmer also. The prophet does not mean that the MP was given for
the first time in the Church. It was at this conference, however, that
the special office of High Priest was for the first time conferred upon
men in this dispensation, except in so far as Apostles are also High
Priests; and of course as there were men who had been ordained to the
apostleship before this conference of Jun, 1831, in that manner there
had been High Priests in the Church, but not otherwise."  

Alright, let's do our favorite thing on this show, and take a skeptical
look at the evidence. We want to look at the pro-Mormon, and the
anti-Mormon side of the facts, and see which one is most 'tight like
unto a dish'. Which of these arguments hold water? I already said that
this is the first time in any Mormon publication that the MP is
mentioned explicitly. It makes no previous appearance before this. Even
when we look back at the JSH, it talks about the Aaronic Priesthood
being conferred on Ollie and Joe by Peter, James, and John, but it makes
no mention of the MP. Beyond that, if you read the footnotes of the JSH,
you will see that it speculates that the MP was given to Joe and Ollie a
few weeks after the Aaronic Priesthood, but there is absolutely no
extant evidence for that. That is purely a baseless assertion by
believing Mormon historians, to make the historical reality fit their
understanding of the idea of the restorationist origination of the
church. 

What do I mean by the restorationist origination there? Just as a short
explanation, the Mormon church claims to be the original church
established by Jesus, restored through Joseph Smith in these Latter
days.

It's hard for a believer to wrap their mind around the idea that God
didn't reveal the whole church to Joe all at once, complete with temple
ordinances, sacrament rituals, and most importantly, the MP. But the
reality is, all of these features were introduced into the church based
on necessity. They weren't all just dropped in at once, like one would
expect the almighty God of the universe to do, but instead came along as
they were needed. This all plays into the idea that Joe's claims of
authority evolved as situations necessitated, which we talked about in
episode 19 titled Priesthood Power Play. If God were using Joseph Smith
to restore the original church to the earth, one would think that it
could be done very simply with divine revelation, all in one complete
package. Instead we see a constant evolution and change in claims, in
order to satisfy specific circumstances. 

Let's address the Mormon apologetic here regarding the MP. In the
footnote that we read from the History of the Church, it claimed that
the MP has been around since the foundation of the church, and anybody
that was called an apostle had this higher M priesthood. Well, here we
run into another problem that spawns from asserting this anachronism.
Nobody in the church was called to the office of High Priest yet. I
believe Joe called himself the high priest of the church, but nobody
else had been called to this office before this point. Beyond that, and
an even bigger problem, nobody had been called as an apostle yet. Up to
this point, everybody that had joined the church was a member, and
anybody that was given any role in a leadership position was called an
Elder. Even our pal Ollie Cowdung was just an Elder, and he was one of
the three founding fathers of the church.

So, when the footnotes of the JSH assert that the MP existed since 1829,
an assertion for which there is absolutely no evidence, and then goes on
to claim in the footnotes that we just read, that everybody that had
been called an apostle up to this point, had the MP, it dually nullifies
the assertions. Both are blatantly anachronistic. In order to make the
history fit their current view on the different priesthoods, the church
has to posit historical occurences that we have absolutely no evidence
for, which is a huge problem from a scholars, or historians perspective.
I'm not saying that I'm either one of those, in fact, to the contrary,
I'm not formally schooled in either of those academic disciplines, but I
do like to look at the pro, and anti-Mormon side of the history,
consider the arguments from both sides, and see which one has the most
explanatory power. So, let's discuss the so-called "anti-Mormon" side of
the argument, and see which side takes the most leaps in logic to come
to their conclusion.

The anti-Mormon perspective would assert that as Joe was organizing his
church, he was flying by the seat of his pants. He didn't know what he
was doing, and therefore when a situation would arise, he would come up
with divine revelation to fix the problem. So, whenever his claim of
divine authority was challenged, he would invent an office higher than
everybody else, in order to supercede any questions of authority. This
happened when Joe and Ollie were both Elders, and Joe wanted to squeeze
Ollie out of the full leadership postition. So, he called himself the
high priest, and revelator of the church. It happened during the
translation of the plates, when Ollie tried to translate a little bit
for himself. In reaction to that, Joe said that Ollie's gift was with
the rod of nature, and not with translation. We referred to this
earlier, but when Hiram Page revealed the location of Zion, Joe claimed
utmost authority to be the one single revelator, which inherently
overpowered any previous spurious revelations, or any later revelations,
given by anybody after this time. 

Well, the so-called anti-Mormon side would assert that this spontaneous
appearance of the MP, was merely another evolution of Joe's authority
claims. If that is the case, then we would expect there to be some point
of insurrection that we could reference that the MP evolved in reaction
to. 

Well, in answer to that, I would assert that we had the uprising of the
"Pure Church of Christ" by Wycam Clark, and Northrop Sweet, that could
be considered one social pressure that forced the introduction of an
authority claim that these two Elders didn't have. Think about it.
Clark, and Sweet were Elders with leadership roles in the church, and
they broke off to start their own church in Kirtland. Joe had to react
to this social pressure somehow, and I would argue that the MP evolved
out of this pressure. It doesn't have to be this one specific offshoot
group, it could have been due to any number of other people that had
dissenting opinions, but this was the first official offshoot, and Joe
must have done something to react to it. Inventing a higher authority
claim, such as the MP, would be a very reasonable reaction to this
church of infidels ("Pure Church of Christ") rising up.

So, tell me... Out of those two perspectives of the facts, which one
makes the most sense? Which argument is tight like unto a dish? Which
really holds water? Is it the side that dubiously claims two historical
anachronisms to fit within the claims of it's belief system? Or is it
the side that requires no dubious historical claims, and falls perfectly
in line with the personality of Joseph Smith up to this point? I tried
my best to present both sides, you have to decide which one makes the
most sense.

Let's get back to the timeline here. We were talking about this new
missionary force of Joe, Hingepin Rigdon, NSSM, and Party-Boy Partridge
heading out to MO, to meet up with the missionary force of Ollie, Dick
Zyban, and Freddy G. Willey, which was stationed in a town called Kaw,
MO. It was about 12 miles west of Independence, MO, right on the edge of
European settlements. The new missionary group spent the next couple of
weeks getting out to MO from Kirtland, proselyting all along the way.
Joe had hitched his wagon to the charismatic preacher, Hingepin Rigdon,
and the wagon train was caboosed by the two rich guys, who were the
almost used up NSSM, who was nearly broke by this time, and Bishop Eddy
Party-Boy Partridge who was running off the Partridge family trust fund.
Together, this mishmash of religious zealots, embarked upon their
journey with relative success. 

When they arrived in MO in July of 1831, this is what was recorded in
the History of the Church vol 1:189

"The meeting of our brethren, who had long awaited our arrival, was a
glorious one, and moistened with many tears. It seemed good and pleasant
for brethren to meet together in unity. But our reflections were many,
coming as we had from a highly cultivated state of society in the east,
and standing now upon the confines or western limits of the United
States, and looking into the vast wilderness of those that sat in
darkness; how natural it was to observe the degredation, leanness of
intellect, ferocity, and jealousy of a people that were nearly a century
behind the times, and to feel for those who roamed about without the
benefit of civilization, refinement, or religion;"

Basically, Joe and company had moved from the modern New York, and Ohio
area, to the shithole that was Missouri, and they were like wow, what a
shithole. These poor people are just wandering around in a haze of
degredation and leanness of intellect. It's a good thing the
missionaries were there to bring some goddamn civility to these country
bumpkin monsters\! Let's talk about how things had been going for the
missionary troop up to this point. Ollie, Dick Zyban, and Freddy Willey
had been proselyting as much as possible, with very minimal success.
P-cubed had returned to Kirtland, only to be sent out to the eastern
states with his brother Orson Brain-Power Pratt on thier own mission.
Last historical episode we talked about the missionary team running into
problems preaching the BoM to the Natives, and trying, but failing to
apply for a permit from General Clark of the Lewis and Clark expedition,
to go preach the gospel to the Natives. Well, we have a letter from
Ollie to Joe that was received on May 7<sup>th</sup> 1831, and I think
it illustrates the entire mood of the missionary trip. I tried pulling
this letter from somewhere other that the History of the Church, but it
seems like it's the primary source for the letter, so I'll just read it
in it's entirety. There's a lot of really good stuff in here to talk
about.

"Our dearly beloved Brethren\<,\>

I have nothing partickuler to write as concerning the
[Lamanites](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#11033339504893567938)
& because of a short journey which I have \<just\> returned from in
consequence of which I have not writen to you since the 16th. of the
last month** **\<I\> and [brother Ziba
\[Peterson\]](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#9340773323951021744)
went into the county East which is
[LaFayette](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#10478302977163057192)
about 40 miles and in the name of Jesus called on the people to repent
many ~~are~~ of whom \<are, I\> believe earnestly searching for truth**
**and if cincerely I pr\[a\]y they may find that precious treasure for
it seems to be wholly fallen in the streets that equity cannot enter**
**in the letter we received ~~of ~~\<from\> you** **we were informed
that the opposition was great against you now our beloved brethren we
verily believe that we can also rejoice that we ~~can~~ are counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name** **for almost the whole country
which consists of Universalists Ath\[e\]ists Deists Presbyterians
Methodists \<Baptists\> & professed Christians Priests & people with all
the Devels from the infernal pit are united and foaming out ther own
shame God forbid that I should bring a railing accusation against them
for Vengence belongeth unto him who is able to repay & herein brethren
we confide.** **I am informed of an other Tribe of
[Lamanites](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#14766435228157934937)
lately who have abundence of flocks of the best kind of sheep & cattle
and manufacture blankets of superior quality the tribe is very numerous
they live three hundred miles west of Santafee and are called navahoes**
**why I mention this tribe is because I feel under obligation to
communicate \<my breth\[r\]en evry informati\[o\]n respecting th\[e\]
Lamanites & ab\[out\].\>** **to you all my Labours and travels
believeing as I do that much is expected from me in the cause of our
Lord and not doubuting but I daily am remembered before the throne of
the most high by all of my brethren as well those who have not seen my
face in the flesh as those who have

We ~~have~~ begin to expect our brother [Parley \[P.
Pratt\]](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#10610689273557452365)
soon we have heard from him only when he was at [St
Louis](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#805410118952844771)<span id="anchor"></span>**
**we are all well (bless the Lord) and preach the gospel we will if
earth and hell oppose our way and we dwell in the midst of
Scort\<p\>ions<span id="anchor-1"></span>** **for in Jesus \<we\> trust
grace be with you all Amen

PS I beseach ~~you~~ [Brother \[Newel K.\]
Whitney](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#16693463917982996535)
to remember & write & direct to me
[Indipendence](http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/letter-from-oliver-cowdery-7-may-1831?p=#6587264720244959116)
Jackson County Missouri"

The main point I'm referring to in that letter that we need to discuss,
is the wealthy Native American tribe that Ollie was referring to. They
were indeed the Navajoes, and they were indeed fairly wealthy in
comparison to a lot of the other tribes. But that letter in and of
itself isn't the interesting thing we really need to discuss here. We
have Ollie's account of his speech to the Delaware Natives. This next
segment will go on for a minute, because there's a lot to read and
discuss here, but we are going to listen to Ollie's sales pitch that he
was using on the Native tribes that the missionary force would
encounter.

This is taken from the footnotes of the History of the Church vol
1:183-185, and it's a doozey.

"On arriving at Independence, two of the company secured employment
while the other three crossed the frontier and began their labors among
the Indians. They visited the Shawnees spending one night with them and
the next day crossed Kansas river and began their labors among the
Delawares. They sought an interview with the chief of the Delawares
known among the whites as Chief Anderson. He was the grand sachem of ten
nations or tribes and consequently possessed large influence. He had
always opposed the introduction of missionaries among people and
therefore did not at first extend a very hearty welcome to the brethren.
However, through an interpreter the brethren made known their errand and
explained to him the Book of Mormon and the information it contained for
his people. They asked to be heard before a full council of his nation,
a proposition which chief Anderson took under consideration until the
next day. Next morning the conversation with the Delaware Chief was
renewed but he was not inclined at first to call council. But as he
began to understand better the nature of the Book of Mormon, he changed
his mind and asked the brethren to suspend their conversation until
council could be assembled. A runner was dispatched to the tribes and in
an hour, forty leading men were assembled and seated in grave silence to
hear the message concerning the book of their forefathers. At the
request of the chief, Oliver Cowdery in substance delivered the
following address."

Up to this point we've just been describing what was happening with the
mission trip. Keep in mind, what we're reading right now happened before
Ollie wrote to General William Clark to gain official access to the
Native tribes. Ollie and friends were out there proselyting to the
Delawares for a couple of days before they were chased out. Let's cover
what was actually said in this exchange with Ollie's speech to the
elders of the Delaware tribe. It's a great insight into Ollie's powerful
ability to sell an invisible product.

"OLIVER COWDERY'S SPEECH TO THE DELAWARES 

Aged Chief and Venerable Council of the Delaware nation, we are glad of
this opportunity to address you as our red brethren and friends. We have
traveled a distance from towards the rising sun to bring you glad news;
we have traveled the wilderness, crossed the deep and wide rivers, and
waded in the deep snows, and in face of the storms of winter to
communicate to you great knowledge which has come to our ears and hearts
and which will do the red man good, as well as the pale face.

Once the red men were many; they occupied the country from sea to sea --
from the rising to the setting sun the whole land was theirs; the Great
Spirit gave it them and no pale faces dwelt among them. But now they are
few in numbers; their possessions are small, and the pale faces are
many.

Thousands of moons ago when the red men's forefathers dwelt in peace and
possessed this whole land, the Great Spirit talked with them and
revealed His law and His will, and much knowledge to their wise men and
prophets. This they wrote in a Book, together with their history, and
the things which should befall their children in the latter days.

This Book was written on plates of gold and handed down from father to
son for many ages and generations.

It was then that the people prospered and were strong and mighty; they
cultivated the earth built buildings and cities and abounded in all good
things as pale faces now do. 

But they became wicked; they killed one another and shed much blood;
killed their prophets and wise men, and sought to destroy the Book. The
Spirit became angry and would speak to them no more; they had no more
good wise dreams; no more visions; no more angels sent among them by the
Great Spirit; and the Lord commanded Mormon and Moroni, their last wise
men prophets to hide the Book in the earth, that it might be preserved
in safety and found and made known in the latter day to the pale faces
who should possess land, that they might again make it known to the red
men, in order to restore them to the knowledge of the will of the Great
Spirit, and to His favor. And if the red men would then receive this
Book, and learn the things written in it, and do according thereunto,
they should be restored to all their rights and privileges; should cease
to fight and kill one another; should become one people; cultivate the
earth in peace, in common with the pale faces, who were willing to
believe and obey the same Book, and be good men and live in peace. 

Then should the red men become great and have plenty to eat and good
clothes to wear, and should be in favor with the Great Spirit and be His
children, while He would be their Great Father, and talk with them, and
raise up prophets and wise and good men amongst them again who should
teach them many things.

This Book, which contained these things, was hid in the earth by Moroni
in a hill called by him Cumorah, which hill is now in the State of New
York, near the village of Palmyra, in Ontario county.

In that neighborhood there lived a young man named Joseph Smith who
prayed to the Great Spirit much, in order that he might know the truth,
and the Spirit sent an angel to him and told him where this Book was hid
by Moroni, and commanded him to go and get it. He accordingly went to
the place and dug in earth and found the Book written on golden plates.

But it was written in the language of the forefathers of the red men;
therefore this young man, being the pale face, could not understand it;
but the angel told and showed him and gave him knowledge of the language
and how to interpret Book. So he interpreted it into the language of the
pale faces, and wrote it on paper and caused it to be printed, and
published thousands of copies of it to them, and then sent us to the red
men to bring some copies of it to them, and to tell them this news. So
we have now come from him, and here is a copy of Book, which we now
present to our red friend, the Chief of the Delawares, which we hope he
will cause to be read and known among his tribe; it will do them good.

We then presented him with a Book of Mormon.

There was a pause in the council and some conversation in their own
language, after which the chief made the following reply:"

Alright, ignoring how racist those terms were, because they were just
the usual jargon back then, Ollie started presenting the book of Mormon
to this wise chief of the Delaware tribe, and the chief told him to hold
off until a large council could be called. A runner was sent out, and a
whole bunch of wise men gathered together. They all listened to the best
sermon that Ollie could muster, and here is the reply given by the
Delaware chief... reportedly anyway....

"THE CHIEF'S REPLY 

We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have come so far and
been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this new news
concerning the Book of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here --
placing his hand on his heart. It is now winter; we are new settlers in
this place; the snow is deep; our cattle and horses are dying; our
wigwams are poor; we have much to do in the spring -- to build houses
and fence and make farms; but we will build a council house and meet
together, and you shall read to us and teach us more concerning the Book
of our fathers and the will of the Great Spirit.

Elder Parley P Pratt in his report of the matter adds: We continued for
several days to instruct the old Chief and many of his tribe. The
interest became more and more intense on their part, from day to day,
until at length nearly the whole tribe began to feel a spirit of inquiry
and excitement on the subject. We found several among them who could
read, and to them we gave copies of the Book, explaining to them that it
was the Book of their forefathers. Some began to rejoice exceedingly and
took great pains to tell the news to others in their own language. The
excitement now reached the frontier settlements in Missouri, and stirred
up the jealousy and envy of the Indian agents and sectarian missionaries
to that degree that we were soon ordered out of the Indian country as
disturbers of the peace, and even threatened with the military in case
of non-compliance. We accordingly departed from the Indian country and
came over the line, and commenced laboring in Jackson county, Missouri,
among the whites. We were well received and listened to by many, and
some were baptized and added to the Church.

Thus ended our first Indian mission, in which we had preached the Gospel
in its fullness and distributed the record of their forefathers among
three tribes, viz the Catteraugus Indians, near Buffalo NY, the Wyandots
of Ohio, and the Delawares west of Missouri."

Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt pp 56-61

When I said that the missionary force was altogether unsuccessful with
their mission trip to Missouri, I suppose I may have been overstating it
a little bit. The problem is, this was taken from the autobiography of
P-cubed, which is a fairly biased account, and it's included in the
History of the Church, which is an extremely biased account. In some
cursory searching, I was unable to find any other evidence of this
mission trip going this well. We know that the stop in Buffalo, NY at
the Catteraugus tribe was barely even a stop. They were reportedly
kicked out after a day. The stop at the Wyandot tribe in Ohio was a
complete failure, as they were chased out mere hours after arrival.
Maybe we can speculate that the Delawares were more tolerant of the
missionaries, but I think that might be going out on a limb. Besides, if
they did baptize some of those natives, we would have record of their
names, or the dates when they were brought into the Mormon fold, like we
do with almost every other member of the church, but the history of the
church is oddly silent on these names. What's more, if a tribe, or even
some members of a tribe of natives did convert to Mormonism, it would
make headlines all over Missouri, and we would have plenty of other
extant sources for it, but I couldn't find any of them in my research.
I'm not saying they don't exist, but I've been looking for a while, and
the search is coming up dry. The only evidence we have of these
Delawares converting to Mormonism, just links back to the same article
we just read, which is contained in the autobiography of P-cubed, and
the History of the Church.

Something that occurred to me during this research is how business was
probably conducted between Native American tribes. I'm only running off
my own naive, uneducated understanding of Native policy, and decorum,
but hear me out for a minute. When the missionary troop starting giving
the sales pitch to the Delaware chief, he stopped the sermon, and told
them to wait for the other local chiefs to arrive before continuing.
Only after a runner was sent, and the other chiefs were all gathered,
did they all sit down, and listen to what Ollie had to say.

Anybody that's played telephone wire with a group of people knows that
messages tend to change, the more times they pass from one person to
another. In this game, everybody sits in a circle, and one person says a
small phrase to another in the circle. The phrase is whispered from one
person to the next, to the next, until the message makes it's way all
the way around the circle. By the time it gets back to the person who
originally said it, the message has changed dramatically, often times
the entire meaning has changed with just a few word substitutions. Well,
the Delawares probably knew about this phenomenon just as much as
everybody else does, so the chief probably wanted all the local chiefs
to hear the message straight from the Cowdungs mouth. 

Once all the chiefs were gathered, Ollie started into his sales pitch,
and got to the point in the story about Joseph Smith uncovering the
plates, and translating them from the language of the Native's
forefathers, into English. That must have been a crazy idea to this
tribe, one they had obviously never heard before. 

So Ollie keeps talking about this amazing prophet that lives in the
East, and the Natives must have been like, "Soooo why isn't *he* here to
tell us about it himself?" The Delawares had been cordial enough to
gather all their local chiefs, but Joe had just sent an emissary to
deliver this eternally important message? Talk about egg on the
Delawares face. These pale-faces with a leatherbound book in hand must
have been interesting to listen to, to say the least, but they were
bringing a message of salvation to the red-men, and the best that the
Great Spirit could muster, was this weaksauce liaison force of entitled
white men whose ancestors had been responsible for fuckin killing all
the Delawares ancestors with their death blankets?

This is where my personal specualtion really starts to come into play a
lot more. Is it really that hard to imagine that these chiefs asked
Ollie to send *his* chief to deliver this message? Put yourself in the
Delaware's moccasins. If you were just living your life, thinking you
had a pretty firm grasp on reality, and an alien saucer flew down and
landed in your local city park, and out step 3 bi-pedal humanoid looking
beings with green skin, wouldn't that freak you out. Beyond that, what
if they tried telling you that they found a copy of the Quran, written
in English, buried in the ground on their planet? Wouldn't that blow
your mind? Then, upon inquiry of their claims, you find out that the
alien who found and translated the book, actually isn't there, he's
still back on planet Gilgar, wouldn't you ask to speak with the actual
alien that found the book? Your interest would definitely be peaked, but
you would still be skeptical until you met that alien, and saw the
original copy of the Quran that it had translated from, and actually
heard the message straight from the horses mouth. 

Well, I speculate that this is what happened with the tribe, and it
served as a small motivating factor to get Joe to make the trek to
Missouri himself, and go visit the Delawares to convert them himself.
But, like I said, it's only speculation, and judging from the records we
have, it wasn't a primary motivation for Joe making the trip himself. If
it were a primary motivation, we would see that recorded in revelations
or something, and we would have an account of Joe going out to talk
Mormon Jesus with the Natives, and as far as I can tell, that didn't
happen. 

The primary reason Joe made the trip out there, was to make an informed
revelation. You see, if Joe's revelations were coming from divine
authority, the revelations would be completely infallible, and Joe
wouldn't require any temporal knowledge to reveal it. That's the basis
by which the Book of Mormon was translated. Remember this story? An
uneducated backwoods boy of 14 years old pulled ancient gold plates from
the ground, and translated them into the wonderful tome of knowledge
known as the Book of Mormon. Joe didn't need to know shit about fuck if
that were the case, and he could have written the most amazing, awe
inspiring book in all of recorded history, without even knowing how to
write. Of course, none of that happened, and the reported story is
deeply flawed in many ways, but the assertion of divinity still holds,
and it remains an unanswered discrepancy in what's reported, versus what
the Book of Mormon actually is. If Joe's revelations were from a source
on high, it wouldn't require any personal knowledge to come up with the
revelation that we're going to talk about next. 

This revelation isn't contained in the Book of Commandments, and I'm not
sure why. It's in the 1835 D\&C, but it's strangely absent from the 1833
BoC. We're going to read it straight from the 1835 D\&C section 27 and
it's a revelation given in Independence, MO July 1831

"1: Hearken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have
assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this
land which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have
appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints: wherefore
this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. And
thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom.
-- Behold the place which is now called Independence, is the center
place, and the spot for the temple is lying westward upon a lot which is
not far from the court house: wherefore it is wisdom that the land
should be purchased by the saints; and also every tract lying westward,
even unto the line running directly between Jew and Gentile. And also
every tract bordering by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are
enabled to buy lands. Behold this is wisdom, that they may obtain it
from an everlasting inheritance."

There we have it. That was one of the biggest revelations in all of
Mormon history. That was the revelation that so many members of the
church had been waiting for for so long before July of 1831. Hiram Page
was chastized for coming up with a revelation similar to that, of which
we don't have a copy, and the justification for the chastizement was due
to him being lead astray by the adversary. This revelation from Joe was
all it took, and so many problems that had arisen in the church before
this time could have been resolved before they were even a fucking
problem, but no, Joe had to go out to Missouri himself, in order to make
an informed revelation about Zion, given by the almighty God of the
universe. That's right, the Almighty Mormon Jehovah/Elohim God, couldn't
give Joe this revelation, until Joe got out there and saw the town for
himself. Now, I would argue, and in fact am arguing that God wouldn't
need to see Independence through Joe's eyes in order to give him that
revelation. God didn't even need to wait until July 1831 to come up with
this shit, he could have included it in the Book of Mormon\! If there
was a passage in the Book of Mormon, that said Independence, MO would be
the place where Zion the New Jerusalem would be built to renew the earth
so it can receive its paradisiacal glory, complete with details about
how it would be westward on a lot, not far from the court house, and Joe
had never been to Missouri before, at very least I would give it a good,
"Hmmmm", and some thought. But Joe had to go the 800 miles to Missouri
himself, even after he had sent a missionary troop there, in order to
come up with a revelation from ALMIGHTY GOD\! Am I the only one that
sees this as a huge fuckin problem? Is this not a gaping fissure in
Joe's credibility as the one true prophet of God? Michel de Nostradame,
aka: Nostradamus, had exponentially more predictive power than Joe ever
did, and he died 5 days short of 278 years before our holy prophet of
the latter days. 

How long until everybody realizes that Joe was just a guy, that built a
religion, and just winged the hell out of it. He was a poor guy, and he
did what he had to, in order to survive. I come back to this point all
the time on the show, but can we really blame Joe for everything he did?
Yes he was a conscientious deceiver, and a father of countless lies, but
he was the product of his upbringing, and the time and place he grew up
in. It's hard to say that he was merely a victim of circumstance,
because he was a devious genius in so many ways, with absolutely no
regard for his fellow man, and very little empathy for anybody that he
didn't directly love or care about. While it may be hard to say that he
was merely a victim of circumstance, it's easy to say that he was deeply
influenced by his circumstances. He was intelligent, and most
importantly adaptable, to the point of psychopathy, or even sadism is
some cases.

I don't think that's something we can talk about enough though, is Joe's
adaptability to any given situation. He dealt with extreme famine his
entire growing up years, he stonewalled through dozens of hardships,
financial and otherwise. Joe loved, and lost. Recall back to June 1828,
when Joe and Emma had their first child. Joe had prophesied that little
Alvin Smith would be the next leader of the church after Joe died, but
to everybody's surprise, little Alvin was born with undescribed defects,
and died a few hours after birth. This was absolutely devastating to the
young prophet. He was a mere 22 years old, and this was a huge tragedy
for him to deal with as a young father. This spurred him to temporarily
join the methodist church that the Hale family attended, probably in an
effort to seek spiritual guidance, or the 19<sup>th</sup> century
equivalent to therapy for the hardships the young couple was dealing
with. 

Often times when a person is overwhelmed by a situation, they will do
things to lash out, or they will simply run away. Everybody feels those
emotions when confronted with a tough situation, but each person reacts
in a unique way to those pressures. When confronted with tough times,
Joe had a habit of running away from his problems. There are countless
examples of this, and quite frankly most of today's episode has been
discussing one of those situations. 

Joe wanted to be a father soooo badly. He wanted a small version of
himself to pass the empire on to, once Joe was on his death bed. Joe and
Emma's first child simply wasn't able to survive, and it must have
ripped them apart on the inside. So much so, that they waited another
two years before getting pregnant again. 

Now I'm starting to navigate into unknown waters, because I'm not a
father, and I don't plan on being one for quite some time, so I have a
hard time empathizing with Joe here, which is something that usually
comes quite easily to me. I can't even understand the pain and emotional
anguish that Joe must have had with the death of his first child. 

I remember watching the movie that's currently playing in the legacy
theater. There's a scene that it shows Joe somberly digging a hole with
tears in his eyes, all while Emma weeps in the background holding a
small childs coffin on her lap. It's a very emotional moment, and I
don't think the film does enough justice to the emotions that must have
been tearing Joseph, and Emma apart, while they were burying their own
first-born child. I just can't get my head there. No matter how much I
think about it, I can't quite get my head in that space, and I'm not
sure that I even want to get there. 

However, I do honestly feel bad for Joe. I feel a deep level of simpathy
for him and all the travesties he dealt with. The more I study Joe, the
more it feels like I'm getting closer and closer to the real Joseph
Smith. That's one thing that keeps me so interested with Mormon history,
is trying to come to some level of understanding about the young
prophet, and everything he went through. 

Everything we've talked about today happened from March, to July 1831.
In March, it seemed like everything was fine, and the church was just
slowly expanding, and dealing with new situations as they would arise.
But suddenly in May and June, there is this huge influx of changes in
leadership, and the biggest push for missionary work the church had ever
experienced in it's year of operation until that point. Suddenly it
becomes very necessary for Joe to make the trip out to Independence to
meet up with Ollie, and establish the place where Zion would be built. 

I don't think that this major shift is without cause. On April
30<sup>th</sup>, 1831, Emma goes into premature labor with twins
Thaddeus, and Louisa Smith. The twins are born, and like some kind of
cruel joke, the twins live for a few hours, and die, just like Alvin had
3 years before. (silence) It was an unimaginable, horrific replay of the
most devastating tragedy the young couple had ever experienced, and it
happened with two children in one day. You just can't imagine what must
have been going through Joseph's head. We read this earlier, it was in
reference to Joe arriving in Missouri, and seeing his best friend Ollie
after 9 months of separation. "\[The meeting\] was a glorious one, and
moistened with many tears". Was that really because they hadn't seen
each other for 9 months, or is there something more to that. Maybe Joe
was reaching out to the one person he was closest to, that understood
him the most, his ol' friend Ollie. 

Put yourself in Rigdon's shoes watching this meeting of old friends. You
had just witnessed Joe go through the hardest three months of his life,
and you get to stand next to Joe and Ollie as they clutch each other,
and unleash a torrent of pent-up sadness. Joe must have hugged Ollie for
what seemed like an eternity, weeping uncontrollably, wrapped in the
security of his best friend's embrace.

Joe wanted to be a father so much, and he had been denied that privelege
for the second and third time in one afternoon. But, when a door closes,
a window often opens, and deaths often come in threes. In trying to
empathize with Joe, I can't decide if what him and Emma did in reaction
to their dead children, was a good thing for them emotionally, or a bad
thing. 

On the same day that Thaddeus, and Louisa Smith died hours after
childbirth, a woman named Julia Murdock died in childbirth. John and
Julia Murdock were good friends of the Smith's, having been some of the
first people to join the church. Well, Julia's twins survived their
mother in the childbirthing process.

Joseph Smith Murdock, and Julia Murdock Smith, were adopted by Joe and
Emma, as if they were some kind of replacements for their own twins that
had died on the same day the Murdock twins were born. I don't know how
this would have affected Joe and Emma, or what it must have done to
their relationship. They had twins of their own that had died, then one
of their friends died the same day while giving birth to twins, so the
Smith's just raised the Murdock twins as their own. For lack of better
words, what an absolute mind-fuck. 

There are a lot of strong people out there. There are people that can
lift a mini cooper, or drag a freight train. There are people that can
bench press 1100 lbs fifteen times in one minute. There are plenty of
stories out there about somebody whose child is in danger and they lift
a car off of them, or pry open mangled metal car doors with nothing but
their bare hands.

While these examples constitute an amazing level of physical fortitude,
and seemingly unbelievable feats of physical strength, the mind is where
real strength lies. Earlier I mentioned that I was on the two most
recent episodes of the Scathing Atheist, wherein Noah and I talked about
the Mountain Meadows Massacre. If you want to hear about some really
disturbing, and fucked up behavior that could cause a person to lose
sleep at night, listen to the second part of that interview on episode
147. At one point I read a quote, after the majority of the massacre had
happened, where the children were just wandering around the meadow in an
almost trance-like state. Some of them were clinging on to their dead
parents, some were pulling their infant siblings out of the arms of
their dead mothers, but all were very damaged. One small infant even had
her arm shot almost clean off from a musket ball. Another quote from a
woman that took the remaining children in after the massacre, said that
the infants arm still oozed from the open wound, but the psychological
damage was still worse. The children wouldn't sleep at night. They would
just stay awake, and wail in sorrow for their parents and family members
they had watched the wholesale slaughter of, at the hands of Mormon
terrorists.

Those children weren't mentally strong enough, and hadn't yet developed
the coping techniques to deal with such a horrific and disgusting
situation. I would argue that there isn't a single person on the planet
that could witness the slaughter of their entire family, and still be
able to function normally after that. 

Human beings can perform amazing feats of physical strength, but only
recently have we begun to dive into what mental strength, or lack
thereof, really means. When people are confronted with tragedy, they
will often times run away. It's a coping mechanism, and it's worked for
a long time. It's not necessarily healthy to run away from emotional
problems, but it does temporarily solve the problem, and everybody does
it to a certain extent. 

Well, Joe ran. When shit really went wrong, and he had no other
solution, he ran. He ran to the arms of the one person that could
understand him. The one person that He was closest to. Joe and Ollie had
been fighting for control of the church, and Joe had been a defcon 3
level asshole to Ollie multiple times, but when it all came down to it,
there wasn't a single person on the planet that could help Joe cope with
this horrible tragedy better, than his best friend Ollie.

Maybe that's why Ollie couldn't break away from Joe for so long. Maybe
that's why he stuck around, because they were emotionally dependent on
each other to a certain extent, and Ollie couldn't accept the reality of
Joe's two-faced ways. At least until he did accept it, and finally acted
accordingly. 

Let's bring the history to a close here. I'll do so by asking a very
simple question. Do you wanna know the most fucked up part about what
we've been talking about for the last 10 minutes? I'm asking, do you
wanna know the worst part about all of this whole child swapping
situation? Of course you do, and that's why you listen to this show.
You're all gluttons for punishment\! Every single listener is committing
gluttony of watching a man's world unravel, and it all happened 180
years ago. It's like a really bad car crash, you can't look away.
Everybody knows how Joe's story ends. We all know he died in 1844, in a
jailhouse shootout. We all know that he dealt with incalculable
hardships, and frustrations, but we don't even know the most fucked up
parts yet. Joe is just getting started, as are his inumerable trials and
tribulations. 

The worst part about everything we've talked about concerning Joe's
adopted twins, is what happened on March 24, 1832. The night Joe was
taking care of 10 month old Joseph Smith Murdock with the measels. That
night, Joe suffered the most horrendous beating of his life, and it all
facilitates the death of little baby Joseph Smith Murdock, Joe's only
son that's been alive for longer than a few hours, that wasn't even of
his own blood. It all leads us to one big question. Really and truly,
how strong was Joseph Smith?
