---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 12 - Joseph Smith Disorderly Disgrace
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-12-joseph-smith-disorderly-disgrace/
libsyn_url: http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/index.html
category: History
date: 2015-02-27 05:00:00 +0000
---

Episode 12

Hello, and welcome to the 12<sup>th</sup> episode of the Naked Mormonism
podcast, I'm Bryce Blankenagel and thank you for joining me. I have to
admit, last episode kind of disappointed me. Like I said, the rabbit
holes are plentiful and deep when it comes to Joseph Smith's 1826 trial
for being a disorderly person and an imposter. The episode seemed fairly
well received, but I feel like I shortchanged everybody when it came to
what I said I was going to cover, compared to what I actually was able
to cover in the usual hour long monologue.

I was able to cover all the witness testimonies that we have record of,
and briefly touched on how we have the records, but I didn't even dive
that deep into addressing the controversy that surrounds the topic, I
just stated that it is indeed, controversial. Well, I want to cover in
this episode, what I couldn't get to in the last episode.

Let me start off by talking about the scholarship surrounding the trial,
and how we know about it, and how we can trust the accuracy of the
Justice Albert Neeley account. The court document that I read last
episode is granted as accurate by pretty much all Mormon historians,
whether or not they are Mormon themselves. Let's talk about why that's
accurate, and the rigorous gauntlet of analysis and peer review that a
historical claim needs stand up against, to be considered accurate
history, as far as we can conclude anyway. When we're talking about a
document like a court manuscript from 189 years ago, it would be really
nice to have the document itself in legible condition in a plastic
sleeve in some library or museum somewhere. But when it comes to this
original document, we don't have that luxury. Like I said last episode,
Emily Pearsall ripped the court document from her uncle Justice Albert
Neeley's dockett book, and that original is nowhere to be found. We
believe that Daniel S. Tuttle had it when Emily died, but we aren't 100%
sure of that, and we have no idea where it could have gone since then.
Last episode I said that we believe Albert Neeley to be in possession of
it last we knew of, but I was completely inaccurate when I said that,
and I need to make the correction. The person who probably had the
manuscript last, was Tuttle, and we'll see how we know that and why very
soon.

Hopefully you'll recall why Emily ripped these pages from the book, as I
said last episode. Emily was on a mission to Utah under the authority of
Episcopalian bishop Daniel S. Tuttle, to try and tell all the Mormons
that they were worshipping a fraudulent man as their founder, and that
they should only worship Jesus alone. As religious zealots often do,
Emily didn't consider the long term ramifications of separating those
documents from their home, if only for the sheer sake of historic
sanctity. She had no idea that they would need to be used and examined
later for authenticity by historians long after her death, she just
wanted to prove the Mormons wrong, no matter what the consequences were.

As annoying as such a selfish act can be, we are talking about it today,
so the documents were publcized before they were lost. Think about it,
if she were to have lost the pages on her journey to Utah, or if they
were stolen by a Mormon zealot or Danite and destroyed, we wouldn't be
talking about this today, and Joe never would have lost the credibility
he did upon the revelation of the documents. Emily did the right thing
upon arriving to Utah, she showed the pages to anybody that was willing
to see them, or debate her on the factual basis of the claims. This
means a lot of people were talking about it, and a few people wrote
about it and published copies. 

From a retrospective look, we can do nothing but thank Emily for her
tireless efforts to expose Joseph for what he was. We've been able to
reconstruct the court document from three independent sources, from
different times that include a lot of similar information. The first and
most useful, is a February 1873 publication of Fraser's magazine, in
which almost the entirety of the document is enclosed. That's actually
where I read the testimony of Joseph Smith Jr., and the other 4 credible
witnesses from last episode. I did use an operative phrase there,
'Credible witnesses'. If you listened to last episode, you know that we
have record of two other witness testimonies that were primarily
recorded from a William D. Purple and the later publication of the Neely
account in the Christian advocate. Fraser's Magazine already weeded out
the less credible witnesses for us, they probably considered the
testimony of Horace Stowell not worth documenting, because he didn't
bring any new information to the table. Then it seems that it didn't
record BDC's testimony because it wasn't included in the Neely account.
But, it is worth noting that the Christian advocate published Horace
Stowell's testimony as noted by Neely, which leads us to believe that
the Christian Advocate publication was copied from the original even
though it was published in 1886, 13 years after the Fraser's
publication.

We also have Big Daddy Cheese's testimony from William D. Purple, but
his testimony wasn't recorded in the Justice Neely account. Purple kind
of made him out to be a crazy old coot, that was an alcoholic vagabond.
Justice Neeley decided, for whatever reason, to discredit BDC's
testimony, and likely the testimony of the mystery seventh witness for
similar reasons, and opted to not include them in his own record of the
court documents, which was probably for the best. I'm not sure if I
prefer this on a personal level, as I like to have all the facts and
testimonies in front of me, and try to examine them based off their own
merits, and the context they were given in. However, this was probably
fairly common legal procedure back then, as it is now, and Neely
probably thought he was doing the public a favor in not including the
wackiest of the testimonies.

One of the primary jobs of a lawyer, is to discredit the opposing side's
witnesses, and bolster the accuracy of their own witness' statements.
Successful lawyers do this with a combination of examining the facts,
and applying their own perspective to any given testimony. As soon as a
witness is discredited for any reason, we can instantly treat any claim
they make in their statment, with an increased level of scrutiny. But,
the discredited testimony does tend to muddy the water when we're
teasing out the truth of the situation. Well, I'm just glad we have
record of the discredited witness statements from sources other than
Fraser's magazine, even if it is a recording from just one other person,
Purple in this case. I like to judge the testimonies of all the
witnesses, and judge the weight of the testimony of the person stating
it, and their connection to the defendant, it seems to provide a much
more wholistic approach to the evidence.

In Purple's account, BDC told us that he strongly believed in Joe's
abilities to see things that couldn't be observed by the naked eye. He
also said that he was basically ashamed that Joe's god given talents
were being used for "filthy lucre, or it's equivalent in earthly
treasures", his words not mine. In fact, BDC only served to further
condemn Joe with his testimony, yet it was still stricken from Justice
Neeley's actual record, possibly because it was too biased, possibly for
other reasons, we aren't sure why. Regardless of why, two testimonies
were struck from the record, and that is the account that we read last
episode from Fraser's magazine. 

But, there were two other sources for similar documents that we'll need
to briefly cover. You see, when it comes to any historical analysis, we
have to try and tease out the real history. Like I said last episode,
when there are conflicting testimonies of a single circumstance, we need
to consider them as a whole, and consider the credibility of the sources
of the information. Instead of mapping this to an analogy of a bully and
a nerd on the playground, let's examine some historical claims for Jesus
of Nazareth, and compare them to what we have about this court document
concerning Joe.

If we were to set up two parallel courtrooms that were trying to
determine the accuracy of the miracles the historical Jesus performed,
in comparison to Joe's seeing treasure in a hat, I think that there's a
lesson to be gleaned.

This might be a bit of a stretch, but follow me for a minute here. When
we're talking about the historical Jesus, there is a massive recurring
theme when it comes to scholarship. Time is on Jesus' side. New
manuscript evidence of the gospels or Pauline letters hasn't been
discovered in decades. Yes, new manuscripts themselves have been found
and catalogued as recently as 2013, but we weren't able to glean any new
evidence from these, as they were later transcripts and copies that are
near worthless when it comes to getting closer to the historical Jesus.
The earliest verifiable writing we have containing anything christianity
is manuscript p52 which contains a very small fragment of John's gospel.
This manuscript was discovered in 1934 and dates back to about 125 c.e.,
and it's smaller than a fucking credit card. It doesn't reveal any new
information about Jesus that we didn't know before, it hasn't been
beneficial to us in any way shape or form from a scholarly perspective,
it's just an old piece of paper, with some stuff written on it that we
already have hundreds of exact copies of. When we are trying to make a
historical assessment of who Jesus was, or what people claimed he did,
he's so far away, and so many years apart from any writings about him,
not to mention, an entire language separated from anything written about
him (Aramaic vs. Greek) It's truly impossible to determine if Jesus
Christ even existed, much less did everything that people wrote about
him doing. 

The problem with any historical analysis is the fact that the further we
age beyond the event or person in question, the more challenging it is
to understand the facts, thus, time is on the historical Jesus' side.

Well, the reason I bring this up, is to contrast it with the historicity
of Joseph Smith's court trial. I've said countless times now that I love
how recent the birth of the LDS church is, because of the relatively
young evidence against it, that there's a proponderance of, recorded
within it's own history. If we were to hypothetically pit the
authenticity of Jesus' miracle claims, vs that of Joseph's claims to see
things with Precious in Mr. Hat that nobody else could see, we can
instantly codemn Joseph Smith for his actions. We can see how plausible
it is that Joe was a complete fraud, and most people around him at the
time considered him such. As far as I'm concerned, time isn't on Joes
side, because we're finding new things out about Joe and new manuscripts
are being discovered that discredit him all the time.

But, condemning Joe based on the court appearance alone depends a lot on
the authenticity of the trial document itself, so let's talk about the
credibility of the court document. Like I said before, the earliest
record we have of the it ,was in Fraser's magazine in 1873, 47 years
after the supposed incident occurred. This includes all but BDC and
Horace Stowell's testimonies. The next record we have of the hearing,
was written by Episcopelian Bishop Daniel S. Tuttle.

Tuttle is an interesting cookie and an integral character in the
normalizing of the Utah territory. He oversaw the construction of St.
Marks Cathedral in SLC, which was the first non-Mormon religious
structure in Utah. He also helped to construct a couple of Christian
schools, and St. Mark's hospital which still stands in SLC. I'm pretty
sure that's actually the hospital I was born in. All of this random
trivia aside, Tuttle was the Protestant missionary president in Utah,
for anybody that was willing to come to Utah, to try to convert those
crazy Mormons. Well, Emily Pearsall was one of the crazy zealots that
answered his call, and brought the court documents torn from her uncle's
docket book with her. We believe Tuttle's record to be directly from the
manuscript, as opposed to just being copied from the Fraser's magazine
article, for a couple of reasons. 

Tuttle wrote in his memiors that Pearsall left the documents with him
before she died in Salt Lake. Also, Tuttle's account written in 1883
details the testimony of Horace Stowell, which isn't included in the
1873 magazine article, meaning he had access to information that the
general public didn't have up to this point. And, for the final kicker,
Fraser's magazine was published in London, England. Pretty much nobody
in the Utah territory knew about the existence of the magazine, much
less the existence of the article that included Joe's trial. It's
unclear whether or not Tuttle would have had access to the article, but
even if he did, the extra evidence that he puts forth, vindicates the
authenticity of his report of the trial. 

So, for these reasons, we can consider the two accounts to be
independent and verifiable as historically accurate, but let's get to
the third construction of the trial which was reported in the newspaper
"The Utah Christian Advocate" in 1886.

We have reason to believe that this is the most carefully recorded of
all the accounts, and was copied from the original, as opposed to copied
from one of the other two sources listed. It may be the latest, but it
is the most complete and most detailed, and contains the itemized
breakdown of charges, that Neely collected for his services, totalling
$2.68.

Alright, so we have the three separate and independent accounts. But, a
mormon apologist or critic of historical texts might say that we don't
have anything to bolster these findings, or to verify that there was
indeed a trial, this whole court document could have been cut from whole
cloth, and copied by multiple people and that's all we have access to
today, right? No... not at all.... You see, while these are verifiable
as independent copies of a single source text, there is other concurring
evidence that we can pile on top of these 3 records. But before getting
to that, we need to examine the controversy, and what some Mormon
apologists say about the trial itself. 

First off, how did this trial come out in recent history? The
information was out there, and has been since 1873, but who found it,
and put the spotlight on it, until it burned it's way into the history
of Mormon scholarship and apologetics? We have a dead author to thank
for that. Fawn Brodie.

The name Fawn Brodie will often cause the hair on the back of believer's
neck to raise, because she wrote the first non-hagiographic biography of
Joseph Smith, meaning a heretics guide to Joe. She wrote the first book
that ever took a skeptical look at the prophet and called into question
a lot of his practices and occult world views. The book I'm refferring
to is, of course, "No Man Knows My History" (1945). She considered Joe
to be a "fraudulent genius of improvisation", which is very easy to
conclude based off the available history. 

Just as a little aside here, Fawn enjoyed bucking the status quo, and
did so very successfully. She was born into an impoverished Ogden, Utah
home, and was known as Fawn McKay. She became quite the historical
scholar and was one of the first tenured female professors of history at
UCLA. She is best known for 5 biographies, one of which is NMKMH,
another of which is, "Thomas Jefferson, an Intimate History" wherein she
controversially concludes that Jefferson took one of his slaves as a
concubine. 

An aside from the aside here for just a second. I see where my
listenership hits, and I know for a fact that Utah alone is responsible
for a fairly significant portion of downloads this show gets. So I know
that there are native Utahn current believeing mormons, questioning
mormons, and plenty of ex-mo's that listen to this show. Did any of you
guys recognize McKay as a familiar name? If I were to say the last names
of Allred, Parrish, Kimball, Pratt, Lyman, Taylor, Lee, Cannon, Grant,
Richards, Hardy, Morgan, Hanks, or Udall, would any of those last names
ring a bell with somebody that you know today? Is your last name one of
the ones I listed? If so, chances are, somewhere in your lineage, there
was polygamy. For some of you, the split off from polygamist family
lines will be more recent than others. I can't verify this for certain
without taking a lot of time to research Fawn Mckay's line, but I'm
fairly certain that not far back in her lineage, her parents or
grandparents came from a polygamist family. That's how recent the
history of the church is. I only listed a few names in my list. There
are hundreds of names through all of Utah, Idaho, Arizona, and even
stretching to mexico, and Canada, that were at some point, part of a
polygamist Mormonite family. If any of you have the time or curiousity,
you should look up your ancestry to see how many generations removed
from Joseph Smith's divinely revealed polygamy you are, it may shock you
to see how close you are.

Anyway, back to my original aside. Fawn McKay, who became Fawn Brodie,
got BLASTED for her scholarship about the 1826 trial, by apologists,
Mormon historians, and TBM's in denial everywhere. However, the more
telling thing, was everybody else's reaction to the biography. People
loved it. [Newsweek](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newsweek)* *called
Brodie's book "a definitive biography in the finest sense of the word,"
and [Time](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_\(magazine\))* magazine
*praised the author for her "skill and scholarship and admirable
detachment." 

But let's hear specifically what Mormon apologists and historians had to
say about it when the book was published in '45.

The Mormon Apostle John A. Widtsoe bluntly stated:

"...Joseph Smith is made to confess to all his errors, including
treasure hunting, peepstone practices, etc., etc. In fact, it is such a
complete self-confession as to throw immediate doubt upon the
genuineness of the document. Joseph Smith was not a fool.... There is no
existing proof that such a trial was ever held." (*_Joseph Smith —
Seeker After Truth_*, 1951, page 78)

    The Mormon Church's *_Deseret News_* called it a "spurious" record:

    "But the alleged find is no discovery at all, for the purported
record has been included in other books... after all her puffing and
promise the author produces ****no court record at all****, though
persistently calling it such.... This alleged record is obviously
spurious... It is patently a fabrication of unknown authorship and
\[was\] never in the court records at all." (*_Deseret News_*, Church
Section, May 11, 1946, as cited in *_A New Witness For Christ in
America_*, enlarged edition, pages 430-431)

Although *No Man Knows My History* criticized many foundational Mormon
beliefs about Joseph Smith, the Church was slow to condemn the work,
even as the book went into a second printing. In 1946, [*The Improvement
Era*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Improvement_Era), an official
magazine produced by the Church, said that many of the book's citations
arose from doubtful sources and that the biography was "of no interest
to Latter-day Saints who have correct knowledge of the history of Joseph
Smith." Isn't the brainwashing of it almost palpable?

The "Church News" section of the [*Deseret
News*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deseret_News) had a lengthy
critique: it praised the biography's "fine literary style" and denounced
it as "a composite of
all [anti-Mormon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-Mormon) books that
have gone before." 

Anytime that something is labeled anti mormon, it's pretty much
instantly written off in the mind of any TBM's. This has been quite an
effective tool for a long time, and it's exactly why my parents dislike
this show. It seems like the truth should be able to stand up on it's
own merits, and if something is false it should be removed from a
persons belief system. But as soon as the 'Anti-Mormon' word gets thrown
out, an impenetrable defensive shield is immediately in place, and it
takes a lot of information to slowly wear it down into submission to the
facts. Keeping members away from information that's contrary to the
belief system they are in, is nothing but a scare tactic of propaganda
to control the Sheeple, and the Mormon church is one of the best at it.

In the booklet, "No, Ma'am, That's Not History", the BYU professor and
LDS historian and apologist [Hugh
Nibley](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hugh_Nibley) challenged Brodie's
claims. He asserted that she had cited sources supportive only of her
conclusions while conveniently ignoring others. Brodie described the
Deseret news article from before as "a well-written, clever piece of
Mormon propaganda," but she dismissed the more popular "No, Ma'am,
That's Not History" as "a flippant and shallow piece."

In May 1946, the LDS Church excommunicated Brodie. She never tried to
regain her
membership.<span id="anchor"></span>[\[28\]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fawn_M._Brodie#cite_note-28) Brodie
once wrote to a friend that what she suffered from her disillusionment
with Mormonism "had to do with the pain I caused my family. The
disillusionment itself was...a liberating experience." Before *No Man
Knows My History* was published, Brodie sought to comfort her parents,
"You brought us all up to revere the truth, which is the noblest ideal a
parent can instill in his children, and the fact that we come out on
somewhat different roads certainly is no reflection on
you."<span id="anchor-1"></span>[\[29\]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fawn_M._Brodie#cite_note-29) Brodie's
mother and three sisters were enthusiastic about the book, but Thomas
McKay refused to read
it.<span id="anchor-2"></span>[\[30\]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fawn_M._Brodie#cite_note-30)

Information is a powerful thing. I become depressed when I see people in
fear of information for the simple fact that it may come in
contradiction with their beliefs. That's exactly what this is an example
of, and that's why we have the Brodie awards today. It's awarded to
various websites, or blogs that distinguish themselves as beneficial to
a largely ex-mormon online group. I do want to congratulate David
Michael on earning Brodie awards in two categories for his My Book of
Mormon Podcast. Good job, and congratulations to you good sir. 

Now that we know who Fawn Brodie is, and why her claims were so
controversial, we can examine how we were able to venerate her claims.
Apologists said there was no factual basis for it, and that the original
sources that we covered earlier were complete forgeries. But historians
don't want to side with either Mormon, or anti-Mormon claims, they just
want the truth. When Fawn tried to dig in to the history, to back up her
claims about the trial, she was chastised, and chased off by her uncle
David O. McKay who would soon be prophet and president of the church, a
mere six years after Fawn's book was published.

So Fawn's hands were tied and she needed another historian to take the
reigns on backing up the court documents with other verifiable document
evidence. Here enters Wesley P. Walters in 1971. This man was on a
mission to find irrefutable evidence to support the reported trial.
Well, he did. Remember when I read the very last line in the court
document that was the breakdown of Justice Neely's bill for services
rendered, totalling in $2.68? Well, this is where that becomes important
for a few reasons.

When you are evaluating an authentic document as opposed to a fraudulent
one, you don't just study the frauds, you also become very familiar with
the signs of authentic documents. When we are talking about historical
documents about Joseph Smith, forgeries are a dime a dozen. Most of
these in recent history were created and traded by convicted murderer
and fraud, Mark Hoffman, but there have been plenty of others. 

When we see a fraudulent document, we can distinguish it from authentic
documents with a few tell-tale signs. We can examine the handwriting,
compare the document to others like it at the time that we know are
authentic, or we find out that there isn't any concurring evidence for
the document in question, which makes it stand out like a sore thumb in
contrast to authentic documents. Well, what Wesley Walters found was the
exact hingepin of document evidence that we needed to prove that the
trial did indeed happen, and that it wasn't a forgery. Ironically, a
Mormon historian did try to plagerize and change the document that
Walters found, but we'll get into that after talking about the document
itself and where it was found.

Walters was painstakingly searching for this document, or others like
it, but the circumstances weren't on his side. The document he found is
called 'Albert Neely, bill of costs, 1826' pretty simple right? Well, it
was found in the basement of the Chenango county office building/jail,
in Norwich N.Y. This little document contains Neely's bill for nine
separate court cases that he heard in 1826. The fifth entry on the page
was on March 20, 1826, for "Joseph Smith, The Glass Looker", and
detailed the $2.68 that he charged the county for his services. 

The fact that this authentic old document was discovered calling Joe by
a derrogatory name that fit with the ruling of the court, that also
confirmed the dollar amount Neely charged which fit right in line with
the original trial document, completely annhilated any scholarly
opposition to the facts. This drove most apologists into silent
acceptance of the facts.

But some wouldn't go down quite so easily, and just accept this
beautiful piece of evidence that was attained. Thus a modern day forgery
surfaced to try and discredit Walter's finding. Mormon historian, from
lovely little Bountiful Utah Ronald Jackson, reported finding a copy of
the document that Walters supposedly found, but instead of saying Joseph
Smith, it said Josiah Stowell, Glass Looker. When the claim was first
made in 1976, apologists quickly latched on, because this could
exonerate Joe's misdeeds, and the TBM historians breathed a hasty sigh
of relief.

Unfortunately for Jackson, the simple fact that it was a forgery, and a
very poor one at that, was brought to light, almost as soon as the claim
was made. If you have the time, I recommend looking at the 1826 trial
article on UTLM.ORG because it contains detailed information about
everything that happened, with picture comparisons of the authentic vs
the forgery, and covers the controversy surrounding it. Regardless, what
we have here is a textbook case of lying for the lord. Ronald Jackson
thought it would be a good idea to try, by any means necessary, to
excorcise Joseph's historical demons, and he lost all his own
credibility in a fit of poetic justice for his crimes. But this does go
to show you, when you are examining something that has this much
evidence surrounding it, you can't just alter some small detail without
creating larger disturbances further up the pipeline of events. 

What I mean is, as soon as we try to harmonize Bossman Josiah Stowell
being the defendant on the stand, with the rest of the history that we
can verify, legitimate historical connections completely fall apart, and
we're left with asking deeper, and unanswerable questions, to try and
make things fit. For instance, if Josiah Stowell was indeed the
defendant in question, and it was just a pre-trial examination, why
would Joseph Smith be there, and what would Joe have to do with any of
it? Why would Joe have been the first one to give a testimony, and why
would he give one at all? Why would Peter G. Bridgeman be filing the
lawsuit in the first place to try and determine guilt against his uncle
Josiah Stowell? What would be the purpose, if not for money's sake,
because money exchanging hands is never discussed in the trial? If
Bossman Joe was the glass looker, why would Joe be the one to show his
own stone to the court as an exhibit? Why would BDC be testifying on
behalf of Bossman Joe while defending the scrying abilities of his son
Joe? You see, when you bring in a forgery, it fucks up everything else
in the timeline, and simply raises more questions than it answers.

But, as soon as we get rid of the forgery, everything falls right back
into sync with the sequence of events. Well, this wasn't the only thing
that Walters found in the basement of the Chenango county jail, there
was also an 1826 bill of costs from a man named Phillip DeZeng that was
found near Neely's bill.

Phillip DeZeng was the constable in 1826 and he billed the county for
arresting Joe and a mittimus, which is just legal jargon for a document
telling a jailer to take a convict to a cell and keep them there for a
given amount of time. This is the exact wording of the important part of
his Phillip's bill. 

serving warrant on joseph smith of chenango Chenango co subpoening 12
witnesses & travel attendance with prisoner two days & 1 night notifying
two justices 10 miles travel with mittimus to take him 

Wesley Walters finding these two documents, was a knock out of the park
compared to most historical finds. Walters found everything needed to
substantiate the published trial documents, with concurring authentic
documents from other public officials at the time, which is something
that's expected when it comes to court documents. 

Do you remember when I said earlier that time is on Jesus' side when we
are talking strictly about the historical Jesus? Well, that's only
because the possiblity of finding any new information about him, is
pretty slim. We've pretty much found everything out about him that we
possibly can from historical texts, and all we can do now is analyze and
hypothesize about him based off the available information. Well, that
isn't so much the case with Joseph Smith and the LDS church. 

There are mountains of information out there about everything that I've
covered, and I only just scrape the surface of the things I present. The
field of Mormon scholarship about the church has new-comers everyday,
and there is new evidence for us to take into account that surfaces
quite frequently. There are possibly thousands of documents that no
historian knows about when it comes to Joe and the church, that just
haven't been incorporated into the puzzle yet, and I look forward to the
revelation of each and every one of them. The more time we spend looking
at Joseph Smith the more we see just how much time isn't on his side.

The reason I bring this up again, is to bury the controversy with even
more facts and authentic documents. Wesley P. Walters passed away in
1990, and was unable to continue his research due to illness before
that, but he was kind enough to pass his legacy of research down to H.
Michael Marquardt, who is one of todays most prominent ex-mormon
historians. Well, Marquardt did a little bit of digging around in county
buildings himself to find more substantiating evidence for the trial. It
wasn't because the proponderance of evidence up to that point wasn't
sufficient to condemn Joseph, it was just a scholarly effort to further
deepen the pool of knowlege about Joe, and fortify the walls of damning
evidence that are slowly closing in on the historical Joseph Smith. 

H. Michael Marquardt is one of my main sources of information for early
mormonism and Smith history leading up to it. One of his best tomes of
knowlege is "The Rise of Mormonism 1816-1844". Almost 700 pages of well
cited and corroborated historical facts contains a lot of crazy fuckshit
that Joe spawned, and I highly recommend checking out the book. I
haven't read it all the way through, as it almost reads like a
historical textbook in a linear timeline, but it's easy to pick up and
easily find exactly what I'm looking for and I fucking love it. Well,
Marquardt is responsible for more court document finds that we are
concerned with in 1988. 

The reason we are concerned with the his findings, is the detail of what
the trial was really classified as. This is controversial, and I don't
know why. Apparently Mormon apologists have tried to argue that this was
a court of special sessions whereas the facts point to it being an
examination before a formal trial is convened, to determine if there is
enough evidence to proceed with a trial. The main argument here, is that
a court of special sessions would have had 3 justices overseeing and
taking notes of the trial, and we couldn't find any concurring evidence
to support that this court of special sessions took place, therefore
it's likely that the Neely account is a forgery. That's the apologetic
anyway. One thing that bolsters this argument is the order in which the
witness testimonies are given, due to it's unconventional nature.
Normally the prosecution would make a case, and the defense would
present their side, then all witnesses would be examined and cross
examined. This Neely account doesn't follow this format at all, and this
was used as evidence against the authenticity of the entire trial
document. Well, Neely includes in his record the use of the word
'examination' which is an operative word, when describing a legal
proceeding. 

Usually pre-trial examinations were heard by one judge, and the
defendant would tell their version of the events, then all the witness
testimonies would follow soon after. Well from all the available
evidence, we can surmise that a simple examination was what happened
here.

Marquardt is responsible for finding the bills of the other three judges
in the area at the time, to see if they had been present for the
hearing, which would indicate a court of special sessions. The bills of
Justices Levi Bigelow, Zachariah Tarble, and Justice Humphrey, all
indicate that none of them had any direct hand in the examination of
Joe, which further bolsters the claim that it was a pre-trial
examination, and Justice Neely's account is accurate. If we accept this
conclusion, everything that follows begins to make sense.

Let's bring this all together, and try to make sense of it, and maybe
we'll be able to figure out the circumstances after the 'guilty' verdict
was given by Neely. 

Picture yourself there, feel free to take some imaginative liberties
when constructing your perspective, because that's what I'm about to do.
Joe and all the witnesses have just finished giving their testimonies.
Justice Neely is on the stand and constable Phillip DeZeng is the
attending bailiff. DeZeng is the constable in charge of the 21 year old
prisoner Joe, and has gotten to know him a little by this time, having
spent a couple days with him by now. The final testimony was a powerful
speech given by Joseph Smith Sr. in defense of Joe's mystical, god-given
powers. Joe and his father are both dressed in rags, dirty, and
altogether uneducated and destitute. BDC is known as being a flagrant
drunkard, and Joe is known to hold his liqour in public a bit poorly
himself. Neither of the men have any money with which to repay Bossman
Joe back, for the time he employed them in failed treasure digging, and
everybody in attendance knows, this is largely a ceremonial trial,
because the defendant is obviously guilty on the charges leveled against
him. 

Justice Neely comes back from his office after having decided the
verdict, and announces to the crowd, that Joe is indeed guilty of the
evidence put forth in the testimonies, and that a formal trial will be
needed to determine the severity of the crime and sentencing. Neely
reads off the legal fees for services rendered and constable DeZeng
tacks on an extra 19c mittimus to take Joe to jail until a formal trial
can be convened. 

Just as DeZeng is about to place the handcuffs back on Joe, Neely calls
DeZeng up to him at the stand, and whispers quietly, without anybody
else knowing, "I wouldn't mind if you lost this one". DeZeng fires back
a quick wink and resumes his task of handcuffing Joe and escorting him
out of the room with authoritative force.

DeZeng walks Joe through the halls of the courthouse, all the while
scolding him for his actions as a vagrant and lazy young man. He takes
Joe to the jail cell he's about to throw him in, and says, "Now son, you
wanna spend your life here\! Do you want these brick walls and iron bars
to be your home forever?\!"

Joe, like anybody would do at a time like this, is drowning in his
remorse and tears. He knows he could be facing a fine, or prison time,
and yet had so much in life to experience before spending any amount of
his life behind bars. The constable has done this to countless wayward
youth by this time in his career, and is expecting everything that's
about to come out of Joe's mouth.

"I'm sorry sir, I didn't know I was doing anything wrong. I'll never use
my powers to look for treasure again, I promise\!" tears are streaming
down his Joe's cheeks.

DeZeng grabs Joe's handcuffed wrists and shakes them, making them clang
in an ominous tone, and effectively shattering Joe's concentration on
the next line he'll formulate, to try and talk his way out of this hole
he dug himself into. "Do you ever want these things around yer wrists
ever again?\!"

Joe sees that the possibility is open, if he just says exactly what the
constable wants him to say. "No, sir" collecting himself and choking
back tears.

DeZeng pulls the keys out of his pocket, and unlocks the handcuffs that
symbolically imprisoned the smooth criminal, and signified something
much more than just giving Joe free use of his hands. "If we ever go
through this again, you won't see the light of day, do you understand
me?\!" Dezeng asserts.

Joe, fully understanding all the implications of what just happened, got
a new lease on life. He nods in silence, which is met by a stern, and
authoritative stare from DeZeng. Joe turns and walks out of the jail a
free man, in effect taking his "leg bail".

I definitely took some artistic liberties there, but it does provide a
naturalistic explanation, and adds the human element to the situation.
Everybody knew that Joe had done what he was convicted for. He deserved
punishment for deceiving honest men on multiple accounts, but it was
just accepted fact that it would be a wasted punishment, and wasted
money, on a vagrant that would be getting 3 state sponsered meals a day.
Joe didn't have the money to pay any fines, and if it was assigned as a
public service punishment, nobody could force such a person to carry out
the sentence. So Constable Phillip DeZeng did the most logical thing. He
let Joe walk.

Now, I pose to you an ethical question. We know that Joe was a fraud and
cheated people out of their money, and was therefore responsible for the
damages done to these honest people he defrauded. But, had he gone
through a full trial process with admitted exhibits of evidence, and
confessed under oath, as opposed to admitting his wrongdoings in an
examination like he did, he probably would've ended up in prison for
lack of paying his fines. Was it better for Joe to be a drain on the
scarce resources of the Chenango County government for years to come, or
was it better for everybody, for him to get a slap on the wrists and
walk? 

I don't know, I'm not sure where I'd fall on this question. On the one
hand, I think that education could have been the solution here, maybe
give Joe an apprenticeship with an actual vocation that he could make a
living on, but that's a perfect world solution, and there's no way to
uphold something like that. Joe probably would have dipped out on that
too, so I guess that probably wouldn't have worked. 

I guess I can pose the question a different way, if Joe did end up being
punished for his actions, maybe he received a $25 dollar fine that he
could never pay. He would be hounded and badgered by the local officials
or the Stowell family until he could pay back what he owed to them in
legal damages. This possibly would've slowly devolved into interest
being assessed, and jail time once the amount became too high. I would
certainly hope that once Joe emerged from a possible 2 or 3, or maybe
even more, month jail sentence, it might just occur to him, that
breaking the law isn't always worth it. Maybe he would have
rehabilitated, maybe he would have changed his ways. There's no possible
way of knowing. But one thing we can be sure of, Joe realized that mind
tricks and telling people what they want to hear, could get him out of
any situation, no matter how bleak the outcome. I would argue that
Constable Phillip DeZeng was a very good teacher for Joe. Not because of
the slap on the wrists speech he hypothetically gave, but for teaching
Joe, just how far he could bend the rules, and how to subvert any and
all authority, and opposition.

This seems made apparent by the other accounts we have of the trial
happening, recalled by A.W. Benton, and Oliver Cowdery (Cowdung
Allover).

This is A.W. Benton's recollection of the unique character Joseph Smith,
written in 1831, making it the earliest reference we have to the trial.

Messrs. Editors--In the sixth number of your paper, I saw a notice of a
sect of people called Mormonites; and thinking that fuller history of
their founder, Joseph Smith, Jr., might be interesting to community, and
particularly to your correspondent in Ohio, where, perhaps, the truth
concerning him may be hard to come at, I will take the trouble to make a
few remarks on the character of the infamous imposter. For several years
preceding the appearance of his book, he was about the country in the
character of a glass-looker; pretending, by means of a certain stone, or
glass, which he put in a hat, to be able to discover lost goods, hidden
treasures, mines of gold and silver, etc.

Although he constantly failed in his pretensions, still he had his dupes
who put implicit confidence in all his words. In this town a wealthy
farmer, named Josiah Stowell, together with others, spent large sums of
money in digging for hidden money which this Smith pretended he could
see, and told them where to dig; but they never found their
treasure. **At length the public, becoming wearied with the base
imposition which he was palming upon the credulity of the ignorant, for
the purpose of sponging his living from their earnings, had him arrested
as a disorderly person, **<span id="anchor-3"></span>**tried and
condemned before a court of justice. But, considering his youth, (he
then being a minor), thinking he might reform his conduct, he was
designedly allowed to escape.**

**This was four or five years ago**.

Then we move to Cowdung's version that was used by Mormon apologists for
a long time before all the pieces of evidence of the trial were put
together. This is from a letter written by Cowdung, to W. W. Phelps in
1835 known as letter 8. It's a fairly praiseworthy letter about the
church and Joe, but this comprises the final paragraph of the letter.

On the private character of our brother I need add nothing further at
present, previous to his obtaining the records of the Nephites, only
that while in that country, some very officious person complained of him
as a disorderly person, and brought him before the authorities of the
county; but there being no cause of action he was honorably acquitted.
From this time forward he continued to receive instruction concerning
the coming forth of the fulness of the gospel, from the mouth of the
heavenly messenger, until he was directed to visit again the place where
the records was deposited. 

It may have taken a while, but the more faithful people were to Joseph,
the more willing they were to overlook everything bad that he did. By
1835, 9 years after the court appearance, Joe's right hand shit-sniffer
had already learned to deflect the conversation, when it came to the
subject of Joe's court appearances. Now, people claim that Joe was
acquitted from his 1826 trial, therefore it doesn't matter, and doesn't
change the fact, yes fact, that Joe was a prophet of god. If anybody
ever tries to make that claim, they are severely uninformed on the
subject, and are committing the same fallacy as Cowdung did 180 years
ago. If there is one piece of damning evidence anybody has against Joe,
it's this court document. The evidence is so abundant, and verifiable,
and has stood up to years of harsh critique. Joe was a fraud, and he
admitted it himself. He used the same method to write the BoM, as he
used to unsucessfully look for treasure, buried by the ancient
inhabitants of the continent, that were guarded by magic spirits that
would move the treasure as they dug for it. 

It will never cease to amaze me that I used to revere this man as a holy
prophet of god. I feel like I've done a disservice to my own
intelligence, and almost feel like I'm responsible for wasting 17 years
of belief in such a massive fraud. But, honestly, I don't think it's
right to solely blame myself for it. 

Don't get me wrong, I never took the time as a believing Mormon to
investigate the claims. I had done a fantastic job of compartmentalizing
my belief away from my skeptical mind. But, was my continued attendance
really my fault? I would argue that it was only mostly, because I was
never told about this by the church, so I could go research it, so I
could decide for myself if the church was worth investing belief into. 

I have a theory why I wasn't told about it. Because the church
leadership is made up of people that were just like me. I'm not talking
about the conglomeration that makes billion dollar business deals every
year with one of the highest donation bases compared to any other
religion. I'm talking about the ward that's run on a local level. The
people in each small community are what really make up the body of the
church, and it's ranks are filled with good, gentle-hearted people. But
these people know what they believe, and have no reason to question it,
nor do they encourage anybody else to question. They have the truth and
they're content. I'm trying to figure out what the reason for this is. I
want to know what the secret key is to unlock people's minds to
skeptical inquiry of their own beliefs. 

You know, I've been thinking about it a lot lately. I've been wrestling
with a very challenging question lately, and I think I might have the
best and most satisfactory answer for it, at least until a better answer
comes along. The question is, "Why are you doing this podcast?" I've
been asked that multiple times now by TBM's and others, and I just keep
stumbling around on the fly, trying to find the best answer for it. 

Well, I think I finally have the best way to answer it, with a return
question, "Why does the church have a missionary force that's twice the
population of my hometown (roughly 80-90,000)?" Because when you have
the truth, you want to share it.

We may all have different things that we call truth, but whatever the
truth really is, will stand up on it's own against scrutiny and
critique, and that's all we can expect from the truth. We can't get mad
at it, we can't rationalize it away, we have to accept it as fact and
move on. I just wish somebody would have confronted me a little more
forcefully about my beliefs, and given me a speech like that while I was
a younger believer, and I might not have used so much energy and so many
years believing in something, that can be demonstrated as laughably, and
histerically false.

Translation story:

Samuel Aldrich is a very kind and caring individual, who takes a lot of
pride in his most prized possessions. Sam has a good job and no wife or
children, so he has a lot of spendable cash for his sweet ass one-ton
pick up truck. Lately, Sam has been feeling a bit of a void in his life,
which he's been trying to fill by pouring more and more money into
making this truck some seriously bad shit. Unfortunately, no matter how
much he enjoyed spending his time and money on this truck, the void
never seemed to be filled for more than a few hours after the newest
shiny chrome piece or performance part is installed. Well, Sam's fateful
translation day is nigh. He had just been dropped off by a coworker at
the tire shop where the truck was getting some new shoes, and was now on
his way home. It's easy to see how content Sam is in the cab of the new
meatier version of his truck, but the void inside is reaching an event
horizon that is set to consume his very sanity, if he doesn't find some
way to satisfy the blackness. All day Sam has been contemplating why
he's here on earth, and where he's going after he dies. With his lifted
spirits dampened by the gravity of these questions, Sam autopilots to a
stop behind a minivan at a railroad crossing. He's so lost in his
thoughts, that nothing seems real to him right now. The world is just a
haze around him, and everything that's happening, is going by as a blur.
Sam's gaze slowly drifts to the people in the van in front of him, and
what he sees snaps him back to reality instantly. The mother with 4
children in the van aren't just sitting at the RR crossing intersection,
the van has stalled out on the tracks, and panic and chaos, are
overcoming logic and solutions among the distressed occupants. Sam sees
why everybody in the van is freaking out, just as the alarms for the
crossing, start to chime. A massive freight train is bearing down on the
helpless people inside the inert minivan, at a deadly unstoppable speed,
but it's only indicated by the sound of the ominous train horns blowing
getting louder and louder. Sam calculates how much time the family has
before the train comes around the bend, and smashes the van into a
crumpled soda can, exterminating any life inside. Sam's adrenal gland
opens the floodgates into his bloodstream, and the whole world becomes
like a slow motion movie. He realizes something that has never occured
to him before. Life is the most important thing in life, and each life
is just as precious as any other life is. There are no saints or
sinners, no catholics and protestants, no christians and muslims, and
neither heaven, nor hell has a seat saved for anybody. Life is all we
have, and all we can strive to preserve in the long run, but when life
can be saved immediately, it takes a true hero to sieze the opportunity.

Sam sees the opportunity to preserve life right now, but it isn't
without cost. As triangle of headlights emerges around the bend, Sam is
posed with a tough choice. He looks at the gauges on his truck, and
thinks about how much he loves what he has, but also sees the children
screaming in terror in the back seat. He knows what needs to be done.
Sam reaches down and slams the truck into 4-wheel drive, and rapps up
the engine. He drops the clutch and plows through the crossing arm and
rams his truck into the back of the van. There is a sickening crunch as
the two vehicles collide as the trucks tires squeal in agony to move the
van from its place of certain destruction. The train brakes were letting
out an earsplitting screetch, but there was no of stopping what was
about to happen. The minivan sluggishly groans out of the way under the
sheer brute force of Sam's massive diesel, just as the train reaches the
intersection. Time comes to a stop. This act of altruism and humanity
has earned Sam a rightful place in the NaMo Outer Darkness realm, and
Demon George and Josh know it. In fact, they saw the entire thing. Their
presence couldn't be seen by any mere mortal, but they were with Sam in
the truck the entire time to see if he would come forward as the next
worthy prospect. George and Josh come to agreement that Sam is to enter
at this moment, and they quickly place Sam's translation talisman on the
center of the trucks steering wheel. Sam sees the glinting trinket
covering the emblem on the wheel, and only has time to grab it right as
the train plows into the truck and it explodes into a fireball of
twisted metal. Very back of the minivan gets clipped by the train and it
spins around violently, but comes to a rest with all inhabitants
rattled, but safe. There is nothing recognizable left of the truck, now
in two main pieces on either side of the train, with millions of smaller
pieces still on fire, littering the crossing. Any spectator knows that
Sam is in multiple pieces himself, but the investigation would turn out
to find the body altogether missing, but there will always be the
outline of his body burned into the leather seats from his perfectly
timed translation. Sam wakes up, not in his truck but in some place new.
There's complete silence, and only three other Demons roaming around the
outer darkness realm. Welcome to the ranks of the Demons in the NaMo
outer darkness kingdom Sam. I hope you enjoy the extra content that
comes with your subscription, and I really want to thank you for your
support. Each recurring donation keeps the show going, and I feel like I
can't thank you enough. 

Well, that's it for today's episode, thank you for joining me. Next
episode, we're going to talk about how much of a problem Joe and his
fellow treasure diggers were around town. Seriously, they made problems
with the holes they dug, and we're going to try and put an estimate on
just how many holes they may have dug, and where they were. Some of them
are even visible today, albiet overgrown with foliage. I hope to talk at
ya again, here on the Naked Mormonism Podcast.

Bonus Content

W. R. Hine who was the feature of last episode's bonus content, has
another little gem for us later on in the same interview that I took
last episodes bonus from. I had to do a little digging to find out who
he was, because the church doesn't even acknowledge his existence. Turns
out, he is another neighbor of the Smiths in New York during Joe's
growing up years, much like Peter ingersoll, who has made an appearance
or two. Well, here it is, and I'll tie it in with something afterwards. 

One day while I was at the Flats, a meeting was held in which the
Spiritual Wife Doctrine was discussed. Rigdon said if he had got to go
into it he might as well begin. He put Emma, Jo Smith's wife, on the bed
and got on himself. Jo became angry. It was in everybody's mouth for
miles about Kirtland.

After hearing that, let's reflect on the D\&C 132, to try and ascertain
the truth here.

D\&C 132 

**51 **Verily, I say unto you: A commandment I give unto mine handmaid,
Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay herself
and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I
did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham, and that I
might require an offering at your hand, by covenant and sacrifice.

<span id="anchor-4"></span> **52 **And let mine handmaid, Emma
Smith, receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph,
and who are virtuous and pure before me; and those who are not pure, and
have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God.

<span id="anchor-5"></span> **53 **For I am the Lord thy God, and ye
shall obey my voice; and I give unto my servant Joseph that he shall be
made ruler over many things; for he hath been faithful over a few
things, and from henceforth I will strengthen him.

<span id="anchor-6"></span> **54 **And I command mine handmaid, Emma
Smith, to abide and cleave unto my servant Joseph, and to none else. But
if she will not abide this commandment she shall be destroyed, saith the
Lord; for I am the Lord thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not
in my law.

<span id="anchor-7"></span> **55 **But if she will not abide this
commandment, then shall my servant Joseph do all things for her, even as
he hath said; and I will bless him and multiply him and give unto him
an hundred-fold in this world, of fathers and mothers, brothers and
sisters, houses and lands, wives and children, and crowns of eternal
livesin the eternal worlds.

I will tell you that I don't think the timelines match up with these
two, so I don't think they were related incidences, but I will just
say.... Mafia wives aren't usually known for their chastity...
