---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 20 - Joe the Ignoramus, and the Book of Pukei
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-20-joe-ignoramus-book-pukei/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/episode-20-joe-the-ignoramus-and-the-book-of-pukei
category: History
date: 2015-07-17 02:24:53 +0000
---

Episode 20 – Joe the Ignoramus, and the Book of Pukei

Description – On this episode, we talk about the interrum period from
when Joe and Marty signed the contract with E.B. Grandin to publish the
Book of Mormon, until the book is published in March 1830. A lot
happens, and Joe starts to really gain a reputation for himself, with
both dissenters, and supporters of his cause. Joe also gives some
revelations about a quick $205,000 that prove to be laughably false.

Website nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music used with permission 

Links: 

Scathing Atheist Episode 126

http://scathingatheist.com/2015/07/16/episode-126-show-notes/

LDS.org "A Snug Log House"

https://www.lds.org/ensign/1985/08/a-snug-log-house?lang=eng

Solomon Chamberlain Autobiography

http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/SChamberlain.html

Welcome to episode 20 of the Naked Mormonism podcast, I'm Bryce
Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me.

The last couple of episodes were done in the interrum time that I was
spending on vacation, and they were both discussion episodes with
listeners that happen to be amazing supporters of the show. So once
again, Thank you Demonista, Preston, and Melissa for giving your time
for the interview, and lending your voices to the Naked Mormonism
information kingdom. Your contributions will forever be known and
appreciated by me, and everybody who listens to the show.

Well, let's get into why everybody listens to this podcast in the first
place, the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.
The last historical episode was a small scratch on the surface of the
Aaronic and Melchizedik priesthoods, and their evolution through the
beginning of the church. It's worth noting that there is waaaay more
nuance than can be covered in a single episode, so we'll talk more about
Joe's evolving authority claims as they become relevant in the story.
But for now, you know the beginning, and that's enough to advance the
timeline.

Let's talk about the Book of Mormon being published. Last time we were
talking about the storyline of the narrative, Joe and company were all
in the Whitmer house in Fayette, N.Y., just finishing up the first draft
of the BoM manuscript. This put us in the middle of June 1829. Well, the
BoM wouldn't be completed and published until March of 1830, so we have
a 9 month period to cover before the BoM was unleashed upon the world,
and the first congregation of the Church of Christ was convened on April
6, 1830. 

So was everybody just standing around while the book was being printed?
Not even hardly at all. The only real example we have of laziness during
this time was that of Joe himself, and that was due to the pyramid power
structure he had built, with his little cronies doing all the footwork
for him. Let's review who Joe had under his control at this point.

He had started early on, with his own family. The most credulous actors
were his younger, and older brother, Samuel, and Hyrum Smith
respectively. Joseph Smith Sr. Aka Big Daddy Cheese also played a bit of
a side role through most of the history of the church, but he was
definitely there the entire time until his death in 1840 in Nauvoo. Big
Daddy Cheese had primed Joe with his own magic world view. With Joe
being as intelligent as he was, he took that world view, and expounded
on it to the point that his own father was taking notes from Joe's crazy
revelatory batshit. So there were the three closest family members Joe
was working with. Lucy Mack Smith, Joe's mom obviously played a very
small role, and she was there the entire time as well.

Next, Joe wrangled in Joseph Knight Sr., Bossman Josiah Stowell, NSSM
Martin Harris, Emma Smith, Oliver Cowdery, D-Day David Whitmer, Peter
Jr., Christian, John, and Peter Whitmer Sr. The rest of the Whitmer
family was along for the ride, but church history makes very little or
no mention of them, so we'll ignore them until they distinguish
themselves, or become relevant. There were other players that had popped
in and out in the storyline by this point, but they weren't particularly
making themselves useful yet, so we'll talk about them when the
storyline comes to them. Hingepin Sidney Rigdon, Hiram Page, and Orrin
Porter Rockwell were just a few of the people in this category.

In episode 18, we covered the two different accounts of the 11
witnesses. The exact date on this sighting experience was never
recorded, so we're left with assuming that it happened in mid June of
1829. Well, the next 2 months were pretty action packed. Joe and Emma
moved back into the Smith house, in Palmyra, from the Whitmer house in
Fayette, a distance of about 25 miles. This was done for a couple of
reasons. Joe couldn't go back to the Hales in Harmony just yet. The
entire Hale family hated him, and he had skipped out on the mortgage
note he signed with Isaac, Emma's father. Joe had to give the Hale
family some time to cool down, and he needed to return there, only after
he had made some real, demonstrable progress on the BoM.

There was another reason Joe and Emma moved to the Smith house in
Palmyra. It was the only place Joe could live surrounded by people that
believed, and supported him, and by extension protected him. He couldn't
get any real work done on his pride and joy, the BoM, if he was
surrounded by naysayers and dissenters, like at the Hale house. Joe had
probably worn his welcome pretty thin in the Whitmer house. Not only was
he not working or contributing to the Whitmer household, but he
introduced three new mouths to feed, and took John and D-Day David away
from their regular household duties. He was just a fucking parasite on
anybody that was willing to give him a shoe-in their door. 

The final reason for moving back to Manchester, was NSSM. Joe had
received the glorious confirmation from Marty that he could see the
angel holding the plates, which signified Marty's commitment to pay the
tab of whatever printing press ended up publishing the BoM. Publishing a
book takes a lot of management from the author and financier of the
book, and Marty would never move from his established farm and home,
just to oversee publishing the BoM. So, moving back to Manchester was
literally the only solution for Joe and Emma. And of course, the now
homeless Oliver Cowdery (Ollie Cowdung), had to come along too, for
various legitimate reasons that we'll talk about in a second.

Upon this move back to the Smith home, Joe kept on Marty pretty hard to
get the book published, just like Marty had promised. Of course, they
didn't just accept the first printer's bid as soon as it came in, they
did a little shopping. Their first stop was the printing press of Egbert
B. Grandin, the local publishing house/printing press/bookstore in
Palmyra. Grandin's bid came in at .60 cents per book, including binding,
equating to $3,000 for the 5,000 copies. This was unfortunately a bit
high because Palmyra was a small town, and the Grandin publishing
company was the only one in town. No competition allowed Grandin to set
the price wherever he saw fit.

With this dollar figure in the back of their minds, Joe and Marty
continued on down the road to check out other possiblities. The Wayne
Sentinel was the name of the local Palmyra newspaper that was published
by the Grandin publishing company. When Joe and Marty told Egbert
Grandin that they wanted to do some shopping around for a better price
once Grandin's bid was in, the Wayne Sentinel decided to publish an
aritcle about them, on June 26, 1829. I don't think that Grandin was
aware that Joe and Marty would ultimately come back and employ his
company as the publisher of the BoM, because the article says some....
choice words about their conquest. 

I pulled this from The Rise of Mormonism by H. Michael Marquardt, but he
originally got it from Dan Vogel's Early Mormon Documents, vol 2.

"Just about in this particular region, for some time past, much
speculation has existed, concerning a pretended discovery, through
suprehuman means, of an ancient record, of a religious and divine nature
and origin, written in ancient characters, impossible to be interpreted
by any to whom the special gift has not been imparted by inspiration. It
is generally known and spoken of as the "Golden Bible." Most people
entertain an idea that the whole matter is the result of a gross
imposition, and a grosser superstition."

I find it hilarious that the Grandin publishing company would allow this
aritcle to be printed using their press if they were planning on doing
the BoM job. If we adjust for inflation, the $3,000 job in 1829 equates
to just over $76,900. If a job for that much money was on the line,
would you print a scathing newspaper article about the people that were
just about to give you that much money? Grandin allowed some other
mistakes when it came to printing the BoM, but we'll get into those
later. Let's come back to what Joe and Marty were up to.

The next town they stopped in was Rochester. At this time, Rochester was
the largest city that was relatively close to Manchester and Palmyra,
just under 30 miles to get an idea. It was a massive trading hub and
metropolitan area that borders Lake Ontario, and Marty must have thought
that the printing prices would be considerably cheaper there, than in
dinky ol' Palmyra. The problem with this would be the cost of logistics.
Any amount of money saved in the printing cost, would be easily soaked
up by putting somebody up for 6 months in Rochester, and transporting
pages of manuscript between the towns, while the book was being printed.

This is another news article, this time from a Rochester based
publication called The Gem, published September 5, 1829. It's one of
multiple similar articles, published by other newspapers around the same
time, and it goes over things we already know up to this point, but it
says some things that are worth talking about briefly. This is pulled
from the same section in Dan Vogel's Early Mormon Documents vol 2.

"A man by the name of Martin Harris, was in this village a few days
since endeavouring to make a contract for printing a large quantitiy of
a work called the Golden Bible. He gave something like the following
account of it. (paraphrasing Marty now) "In the autumn of 1827 a man
named Joseph Smith of Manchester, in Ontario County, said that he had
been visited by the spirit of the Almighty in a dream, and informed that
in a certain hill in that town, was deposited a Golden Bible, containing
an ancient record of divine origin. He states that after a third visit
from the same spirit in a dream, he proceeded to the spot, removed
earth, and there found the Bible, together with a large pair of
spectacles, he had also been directed to let no mortal see them under
the penalty of immediate death, which injunction he steadfastly adheres
to. The treasure consisted of a number of gold plates, about 8" long, 6
wide and one eighth of an inch thick, on which were engraved
hieroglypics. By placing the spectacles in a hat and looking into it,
Smith interprets the characters into the English language."

Just a couple things there to mention. Where the fuck is the history
that we're taught by the church today? This was arguably one of the
earliest printed accounts of Joe's story, and I realize that it's not
100% reliable, but it was a local newspaper, written by a person that
directly interviewed Marty in 1829, before the BoM was published, and
before the Church of Christ had started. It has at least some level of
credibility, and it seems to leave out some VERY major details in
comparison to todays story. Where was the visitation from God and Jesus
in 1820? What about the first angellic visitation in 1823? What about
the ancient breastplate that held the Urim and Thummim being found with
the plates? Why was the angel called a spirit of the Almighty, and not
called an angel, or specifically the angel Nephi, or angel Moroni as in
later accounts? It said that no mortal could see the plates under
penalty of instant death, but at this time supposedly 11 witnesses other
than Joe had seen them to a level that was convincing enough to go along
with Joe's story. How does one explain these contradictions? This
doesn't even mention the inconsistencies with the translation method
itself. This article reports that Joe was using rocks in a hat, less
than 4 months after he was doing so. But even today, in spite of well
established historical fact, the church history cleverly skirts that
part of the story. So once again, I ask... Where the fuck is the history
that I was taught growing up, and believing Mormons are taught today?
It's sad that a newspaper article from 186 years ago has more historical
veracity than the history reported by the church itself today.

Alright, digression over. After Joe and Marty decided against the
logistical nightmare of commissioning a Rochester printer, they headed
back to Egbert Grandin in Palmyra to strike up a deal. On August 23,
1829, NSSM did his Not-So-Smartiest move yet, and signed a contract with
Grandin "in consideration of the sum of Three-Thousand dollars" for
typesetting, printing, and binding the BoM. This was secured by a
mortgage for "The same tract of land or farm upon which the said Martin
Harris now resides" and was to be paid in 18 months. We have an original
copy of this contract, currently held by the Wayne County Courthouse in
Lyons, N.Y. Have I recently mentioned how much I love the history of the
LDS church? It's so young, and well documented, and legally binding
court documents still exist in the handwriting of the actual people
involved. It's so fascinating\!

Once the contract was drawn up, work immediately commenced on the BoM.
Well, on the authorship side anyway. You see, the industrial sized
printing press spit out 16 pages of text at a time. The tedious nature
of the typesetting process was the most time consuming part of the job.
Each line of text was held in a very small rail, and each rail had all
the individual letters and punctuation marks placed in reverse order
inside these small rails. Each massive printing plate had 16 pages worth
of text held inside these rails. Once all the individual letters and
punctuations were placed correctly, they were proof-read multiple times
by the typesetter, in this case John H. Gilbert, and then they were
mounted for printing. Once mounted, the printing press machine itself
would dip this plate in a vat of ink, and move a square of 16 pages of
paper underneath the plate, and press the inked words onto the blank
pages. A printing and collating job of 5,000 copies of anything would
take a current industrial printer a couple of hours to perform. Printing
the BoM was started in August of 1829, and completed mid-late March
1830. 7 months of work for one, possibly two guys, working probably 50+
hours per week, just to print Joe's holy dribble known as the Golden
Bible.

The job would have gone faster, if Joe wasn't an unprepared,
narcissitic, paranoid, neurotic. But Grandin was paid by the page, not
the hour, so any hurry Joe was in to print the book, was only created by
his own anxiety to start his congregation.

Once the contract was signed between Grandin and NSSM, a printers
manuscript needed to be created. But of course, Joe and Ollie only had
the original manuscript in hand, with dashes and edits and countless
spelling errors, making it nowhere near fit to go to the typesetter. The
solution to this, of course, was for Ollie to move into the Smith house,
and help Joe create the printers manuscript. Peter Whitmer Jr., also
moved into the Smith house that was small for just the Smith family
alone. Now, there were four more young adults living in the house with
mouths to feed, and needing places to sleep. You can only imagine how
cramped and unpleasant this must have been. There is a little article on
LDS.org called a "A snug log house" that details the dimensions of the
log home that these 14 people were stuffed into. It measured about 24 by
36 feet, approx. 850 sq. ft., and it was one story with two rooms and a
small second story loft for all the kids to live in together.

For my job I do a route that's repeated every two weeks, so I see the
same people on the same day in that two week rotation. Every time I walk
in to one of my stops, the very nice lady there asks if I'm married and
making kids yet. By this point it's become a bit of a game between us.
She keeps telling me I should give my parents grandkids, and life is so
much more fulfilling with children in it. Well, I continually parry her
suggestions by simply saying I don't like kids, and I can't imagine any
situation in my life right now that would be made better, with kids in
it. I'm 24 right now, effectively working 2 full time jobs, and I can't
imagine the thought of having to devote countless sleep deprived hours,
and hundreds of thousands of dollars to raising a kid or two, especially
right now. Well, to this lady's credit, she had her first kid when she
was 17, and by my age had popped out all 4 of her kids, and she does
make some good arguments. She's essentially an empty nester now, and
claims that she couldn't imagine how her life would be different, if she
didn't have her kids when she had them. She talks about how much joy
they've brought to her life over the years, and how loved she feels
whenever she talks to any of her kids about anything in their, now,
adult lives. She regales me with stories of camping trips, and school
dances, and even sitting on the sidelines at sporting events, and it all
sounds fun. But I continue to fire back with "Well, it's a lot easier to
remember all the fun times, because that's what sticks with you. You
don't remember all the shitty diapers, and runny noses, and complaining,
and whining, and disciplining, and arguments with your spouse about
childrearing and money problems, and having to pick the teenagers up
from the police station at 2 in the morning, and how much the kids hated
you during their teenage years, and all the other myriad inconveniences
and frustrations that come along with raising little versions of
yourself." It's just easier to remember the fun times, and pass them
along to the younger generation as what she considers wisdom through
experience. 

The reason I bring this up is to shed light on what we consider comfort
by today's standards. I live with one roommate in a 3 bedroom 2 bath
bachelor pad that's 2 full floors at about 1000 sq. ft. per floor, and
it's rather comfortable. This house is pretty average for one family,
but I could never imagine having a main floor that's considerably
smaller than this one, an upstairs that's just a single room and waaaay
smaller than the main floor, and trying to squeeze 14 fucking people in
it\! It's unbelievable to consider the logistics alone, forget about
meals, or bath time. I recommend going online and doing a google search
for the Smith Log Home Palmyra N.Y. The plot is owned by the church, and
they have a model replica of the home, built on the same area the
original home was on. There are dozens of pictures, and they even run
guided tours of it. The tours are probably about 6 minutes long because
you walk in the front door and look around and say wow, this is really
fuckin small. Then go up the stairs and see the main room that all the
kids lived in, and say holy shit, this is really fuckin small. And then
leave because the next tour group is probably on it's way and there's no
way that two full tour groups of 10 people could fit inside that dinky
little shack. 

You almost have to ask, why the fuck did Big Daddy Cheese, and Lucy Mack
Momma Cheese decided to have 10 kids growing up in that house? Did they
think their lives would get eaiser with each kid or something? Did they
not understand where children came from? I know that sex education was
dispicable or non-existent at that time, but they had to get a clue
after the first half dozen, right? I talk about all of this for one
reason, to show how fucking cramped it really was inside that little
place, before Joe, Emma, Peter, and Ollie moved in, let alone, after.
Imagine how high the tensions must have ran. I bet every little
mannerism that everybody had, or every little fart, drove every other
person in the house nucking futs\! Gawd I can't imagine how shitty that
must have been.

Anyway, massive digression over. So Ollie and Peter Whitmer start
transcribing the original manuscript, with Joe's help, to prepare a
printers manuscript for John Gilbert to use in setting the type plates.
The crew was madly scribbling the contents onto the printers manuscript
on foolscap paper, but as we've learned in the past, they simply
neglected to add any punctuation, paragraph, or verse breaks, or even
correct most of the spelling errors. Each chapter was one long block
sentence, and was usually terminated with an amen or single period,
before moving on to the next chapter.

This was read a couple of episodes ago, but let's go back to John H.
Gilbert's Memorandum of the situation. This is pulled from Dan Vogel's
Early Mormon Documents vol 2 page 543.

"When the printer was ready to commence work, Harris was notified, and
Hyrum Smith brought the first installment of the manuscript, of 24
pages, closely written on common foolscap paper; he had it under his
vest, and vest and coat closely buttoned over it. At night Smith came
and got the manuscript, and with the same precaution carried it away.
The next morning with the same watchfulness, he brought it again, and at
night took it away. This was kept up for several days. The title page
was first set up, and after proof was read and corrected, several copies
were printed for Harris and his friends. On the second day—Harris and
Smith being in the office—I called their attention to a grammatical
error, and asked whether I should correct it: Harris consulted with
Smith a short time, and turned to me and said; "The Old Testament is
ungrammatical, set it as it is written."

When I said earlier that Joe was unprepared, paranoid, and neurotic,
this was the symptom I was using to make that claim. Joe was so afraid
that someone would lose the manuscript, or it would be stolen or read by
an untrusted individual, that once enough of the printers manuscript had
been completed to start printing, Joe made Hyrum tuck the manuscript
under his vest and coat, and walk to the printer in the morning, to make
sure nobody would fuck with it. Then, he would walk back to the printing
office in the evening before closing time, and tuck it back in the
safety of his coat, and take it back to the Smith home. John Gilbert
must have been wondering what the actual fuck was going on here, because
this was probably considered really unconventional, and time consuming.
A big problem with doing business this way, was the time limitation
Gilbert had with his typesetting duties during the day. Like I said
earlier, the printers manuscript wasn't punctuated, or proof-read for
typos, so Gilbert had to do all that himself during the daytime, which
was all time that could be spent actually setting the type. Well,
Gilbert got fed up with how time consuming this was, and finally said
something to Hyrum after a few days of the same song and dance.

It continues:

"After working a few days, I said to Smith on his handing me the
manuscript in the morning; "Mr. Smith, if you would leave this
manuscript with me, I would take it home with me at night and read and
punctuate it, and I could get along faster in the day time, for now I
have frequently to stop and read half a page to find how to punctuate
it." His reply was, "We are commanded not to leave it."

Where do you think that commandment came from? Of fuckin course it was
Joe\! Joe was so paranoid and neurotic, that he issued a commandment
from God, to his brother Hyrum, to not leave the manuscript out of his
hands overnight with anybody that couldn't be trusted. Was a commandment
really necessary to make Hyrum follow Joe's wishes? Well, we'll see in
the future, that might just have been the case. If any listeners have
older siblings like I do, you know how hard it is to get them to do
something you ask, especially when they're irrational and you don't have
a good reason for asking them to do it. Well, if you're just a conduit
for God, like Joe was, you can just babble some divine revelation, and
suddenly older siblings become a lot more motivated to help. That's
pressumably what happened here. Well, after Hyrum had said that he was
commanded to not leave the manuscript with Gilbert overnight, Gilbert
continues on in his memorandum.

"A few mornings after this, when Smith handed me the manuscript, he said
to me:--"If you will give your word that this manuscript shall be
returned to us when you get through with it, I will leave it with you."
I assured Smith that it should be returned all right when I got through
with it. For two or three nights I took it home with me and read it, and
punctuated it with a lead pencil."

This must have made the work go exponentially faster. There's no way of
knowing how much longer the printing would have taken, if the entire
book was printed the way Gilbert first described. You have to
understand, most of the publications that Gilbert, or any typesetter for
that matter, were working with, were complete, proof-read, edited final
drafts of whatever was about to be printed. But the BoM was printed from
it's second draft, that was being written while the previous pages were
being edited, and proof-read, by Gilbert, a common typesetter, that was
by no means a grammatician, or professional editor. It's really no
wonder why the BoM was such a fucking mess when it was printed in 1830,
and it's gone through multiple overhauls since then with over 4,000
changes. The original manuscript must have been incomplete monkey shit
thrown at paper with some lines drawn through it before it was
transcribed into the printers copy. Fuck I want to see that thing\! Why
did Joe have to bury it in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo temple\!? Did
he not understand that people studying his religion later on might want
to see what was there? Or maybe he did understand that, and that's why
he buried it.... I suppose we won't know until we die and go to Mormon
heaven, and get to ask Joe in person while he's on the judgement panel
with God and Jesus.

Arduous editing wasn't the only problem that plagued Gilbert when he was
setting the type for, and printing the book. The next problem was either
slow work, or procrasturbation on the Smith side of the equation. Ollie,
Joe and Peter were slaving away to try and get the printers manuscript
up and running, before Gilbert needed the next set of pages for
printing. You see, once the manuscript was edited for printing, and the
type was set, the actual printing only took a day or two, because it
just involved placing blank paper in the press, and pulling out and
cutting the printed pages into their bindable format. Well, Gilbert
caught up to the three transcribateers, and ended up surpassing them.
This forced Gilbert to use the original manuscript, warts, blemishes and
all for nearly a sixth of the entire BoM. The section he used it for was
the last part of Heleman, all the way through to the end of Mormon.
That's the last almost 100 pages that Gilbert didn't have a printers
manuscript for. The printers manuscript for those pages was completed
after the book was already finished being printed, and some of the words
in it vary from the original manuscript that Gilbert used to print the
book, meaning the published version of the BoM in those 100 pages
differs from the printers manuscript, which differs from the original
manuscript uttered by Joe and scribed by Ollie and others. What a
fucking mess.

Another funny thing about Gilbert's typesetting was when he got to the
Isaiah chapters in Nephi. Apparently Gilbert was frustrated enough with
trying to punctuate the book himself, that he actually used a KJV bible
to help him punctuate and edit everything that Joe plagerized from the
bible. I mean, I would too if it made the job a lot easier, but I just
find it funny that Gilbert used the bible to correct the plagerisms of
the bible that Joe stole, in order to edit it for print.

Another funny addition was the fact that Gilbert corrected some of the
punctuation and words mid-print. Meaning that sometimes he would set the
type, print a couple sets of pages, notice a problem or discrepancy, and
change the type for the rest of the print. This means that of the 5,000
copies of the original BoM, each book could vary from the last by a
couple words, or punctuation marks. The most correct book on the planet,
had discrepancies from one copy to the next, in it's very first
printing, and it was copied using relatively modern industrial
machinery. The problems with the BoM doomed this damn thing from it's
inception, yet the myth that it's correct by any standard, still
perpetuates today somehow.

So that's what was happening at the Grandin Printing company, but what
was happening with Joe and everybody else? That's what we're interested
in. Gilbert had said that Oliver, Hyrum, and NSSM were frequent visitors
to the office, but Joe himself never came by but maybe once during the
entire publication. Well, the whole Smith family, Joe, Emma, Ollie, and
Peter Whitmer were living at the Smith home preparing the printers
manuscript, for a while anyway. Then, as Joe was prone to do, he set the
wheels into motion in his favor, and then fucked off. In early fall of
1829, He and Emma moved back to their home on the Hale property in
Harmony PA. It isn't really known what Joe was doing day to day there
while the BoM was being printed, but we can assume he was probably
mending his relationship with the Hale family and working hard for some
real money. And breeding unicorns and baking magic fucking cupcakes to
cure cancer because of fucking course he wasn't working hard to make a
living. He was doing his usual Joe shit and probably telling the Hale
family how awesome and rightous he was now, because his prophet
aspirations were finally being achieved. He had finished writing the
book that Issac, Joe's father in law, had been nay-saying for so long,
and everything else was on autopilot until the book was published. Joe
was officially a published author, and nobody would knock him off that
pedestal once he scrambled his way to the top of it. 

In fact, Joe spent a bit of his time during the printing being his own
copyright enforcer. Normally copyright infringement would be enforced by
local police, even in that day, but Joe would rather take his vengence
for this "persecution" into his own hands. Something that I recently
found in Dan Vogel's Early Mormon documents vol 2 was another newspaper
publication that came out of Palmyra, NY. It was called the Palmyra
Reflector. It was run by a guy named Abner Cole under the pen-name
Obadiah Dogberry, and it was a satirical publication that was rather
artful at making fun of whatever was big in Palmyra at any given time.
This guy dug deep into the bottomless well of Joseph Smith that was ripe
for satire. The best part about it, he rented Grandin's printing press
on nights and weekends to print his paper, meaning he had free access to
the BoM while it was being printed. He ended up publishing the first
couple of chapters of Nephi, which, for the record, he had no right to
do, and this is what gave Joe grounds to leave Harmony to visit with him
in January of 1830. But really, this guy was awesome\! He would even
write some of his articles in queens english like the BoM and throw in
unnecessary "it came to passes", just to fuck with Joe. I'll read a few
excerpts from his paper, like I said, pulled from Dan Vogel's Early
Mormon Documents, vol 2.

Before reading this excerpt, I'll need to offer some context. Luman
Walters was a well known treasure seeker and user of scrying stones in
Joe's treasure seeking group. He didn't gain his reputation there, but
he was brought from another town to do some consulting work with Joe and
company, and lo and behold, Joe ended up pulling the plates from the
ground soon after. Walters was kind of like Samuel Lawrence, or Joseph
Knight Sr., in the consultation respect. 

Abner Cole aka Obadiah Dogberry, is credited with writing the first
parody of the BoM called the book of Pukei. We're going to read a few
verses from the first and second chapters of this satirical masterpiece.

"The book of Pukei Chapter 1:1 And it came to pass in the latter days,
that wickedness did much abound in the land, and the "Idle and slothful
said one to another, let us send for Walters the Magician, who has
strange books, and deals with familiar spirits; peradventure he will
inform us where the Nephites, hid their treasure, so be it, that we and
our vagabond van, do not perish for lack of sustenance."

"Verse 3 And the Idle and Slothful paid tribute unto the Magician, and
besought him saying, Oh\! Thou who art wise above all men, and can
interpret the book that no man understandeth, and can discover hidden
things by the power of thy enchantments, lead us, we pray thee to the
place where the Nephites buried their treasure, and give us power over
"the spirit," and we will be thy servants forever.

4\. And the Magician led the rabble into a dark grove, in a place called
Manchester, where after drawing a Magic circle, with a rusty sword, and
collecting his motley crew of latter-demallions, within the centre, he
sacrificed a Cock for the purpose of propi\[t\]iating the prince of
spirits."

So this guy Luman Walters the Magician, came in to do some consulting
work with the treasure digging group on the hill Cumorah, to help them
find the treasure they'd been seeking for so long. He does this weird
ritual that involves reading some latin passages from a book, drawing a
circle in the dirt with a rusty sword, and sacrificing his unblemished
cock to the treasure sprits.... What in the actual fuck? These were the
people that Joe emulated and learned from... Let's find out about the
outcome of this weird blood ritual.

"5. All things being ready, the Idle and Slothful fell to work with a
zeal deserving a better cause, and many a live long night was spent in
digging for "the root of all evil."

6\. Howbeit, owing to the wickedness and hardness of their hearts, these
credulous and ignorant knaves, were always disappointed, till finally,
their hopes, although frequently on the eve of consummation, like that
of the hypocrite, perished, and their hearts became faint within them.

7\. And it came to pass, that when the Idle and Slothful became weary of
their nightly labors, they said one to another, lo\! This imp of the
Devil, hath deceived us, let us no more of him, or peradventure,
ourselves, our wives, and our little ones, will become chargeable on the
town."

So, Luman Walters performed this cock blood sacrifice ritual, and it
didn't work for multiple nights in a row, and the group of treasure
seekers became discouraged, and abandoned their campaign. Does that seem
familiar at all? Let's finish the chapter to see what happened next.
Remember, this is a parody of Joe and his group, and the best part about
it, is how close it follows in line with what we know to have happened.
I fucking love this Obadiah Dogberry guy\!

"8. Now when Walters the Magician heard these things, he was sorely
grieved, and said unto himself, lo\! Mine occupation is gone, even these
ignorant vagabonds, the idle and slothful detect mine impostures. I will
away and hide myself, lest the strong arm of the law should bring me to
justice.

9\. And he took his book, and his rusty sword, and his magic stone, and
his stuffed Toad, and all his implements of witchcraft and retired to
the mountains near Great Sodus Bay, where he holds communion with the
Devil, even unto this day."

Ooooh beautiful isn't it. Frauds like this were getting popped left and
right by the law because people didn't like being lied to when it came
to magic rituals and buried treasure. As we know, Joe fell victim to the
law for the same damn thing in 1826, but he didn't escape the law like
Walters did, he had to stand trial. There's one verse left in the
chapter, let's hear how Dogberry brings it to a close.

"10. Now the rest of the acts of the magician, how his mantle fell upon
the prophet Joe Smith Jun. And how Joe made a league with the spirit,
who afterwards turned out to be an angel, and how he obtained the "Gold
Bible," Spectacles, and breast plate, will they not be faithfully
recorded in the book of Pukei?"

Oh my gawd I love this guy. He brings it all together in a scathing
format, mimicking the BoM writing style to tell Joe's story. People with
access to a printing press, were just as much assholes as they are
today, only the medium has changedl and they're called internet trolls.
I fucking love it so much, I can't even express how great it is. We have
to read some of chapter 2, because Dogberry gives Joe a surname that
just can't be ignored.

"The Book of Pukei Chapter 2:1 And it came to pass (DRINK\!) that when
the mantle of Walters the Magician had fallen upon Joseph, sirnamed the
prophet, who was the son of Joseph, that the "Idle and Slothful"
gathered themselves together, in the presence of Joseph, and said unto
him, "Lo\! We will be thy servants forever, do with us, our wives, and
our little ones as it may seem good in thine eyes."

I don't think Joe had any problem doing what he wanted with his friends
wives and little ones.... just saying...

"2. And the prophet answered and said, "Behold\! Hath not the mantle of
Walters the Magician fallen upon me, and am I not able to do before you
my people great wonders, and shew you, at a more proper season, where
the nephites hid their treasures? For Lo\! Yesternight stood before me
in the wilderness of Manchester, the spirit, who, from the beginning,
has had in keeping all the treasures, hidden in the bowels of the
earth."

Continuing on verse 4. "And I looked, and behold a little old man stood
before me, clad, as I supposed, in Egyptian raiment, except his Indian
blanket, and moccasins, his beard of silver white, hung far below his
knees. On his head was an old fashioned military half cocked hat, such
as was worn in the days of the patriarch Moses, his speech was sweeter
than molasses, and his words were the reformed Egyptian.

5\. And he again said unto me, "Joseph, thou who hast been surnamed the
ignoramus, knowest thou not, that great signs and wonders are to be done
by thine hands? Knowest thou not, that I have been sent unto thee by
Moromn, the great apostle to the Nephites, Mormon who was chief among
the lost ten tribes of Israel?"

It continues on like that for a while with little jabs at Joe's
character and the entire story of the Golden Bible. Among his multiple
publications of the Palmyra Reflector, Abner Cole published the first
two chapters of the BoM from Jan 2, to Jan 22, which prompted the ire of
Joe and Co. But, once he became aware of the copyright infringment, Joe
wasn't going to go through legal means or civil suit to halt the rogue
reporter's actions. Joe and Co., reportedly first became aware of Cole's
actions due to a funny feeling that Hyrum had, and totally not from the
people around town that read the newspaper and were making fun of Joe.

This is a piece extracted from Lucy's book page 470-71 originally,
making it a first hand account, however, I'm pulling it from The Rise of
Mormonism by H. Michael Marquardt page 152.

"Lucy Smith remembered that in January 1830 on "One Sunday afternoon
Hyrum became very uneasy, he told Oliver that his peculiar feelings led
him to believe that something going was wrong at printing Office"
\[sic\] Oliver and Hyrum went to Grandin's printing establishment and
found Abner Cole "at work printing a paper which seemed to be a weekly
periodical." Hyrum discovered that Cole was printing portions of the BoM
in his paper."

"...Mr. Cole, said he \[Hyrum\], what right have you to print the BoM in
this way, do you not know that we have secured a copyright?"

Lucy continues, "Hyrum and Oliver returned immediately home and after
counciling with Mr. Smith \[Big Daddy Cheese\] it was considered
necessary that Joseph should be sent for. Accordingly my husband set out
as soon as possible for Penn."

Abner Cole, aka Obadiah Dogberry was publishing the BoM in his own
newspaper. That was blatantly illegal, and simply wrong. But one might
wonder why Joe and everybody was so offended by it. You would think that
a holy text could stand on it's own merits, and reading the first couple
chapters would spark people's curiousity to know what was going to be in
the rest of the book. If anything, Cole was doing Joe a favor by
exposing everybody that read his paper, to a teaser of the BoM. If I was
reading this guys newspaper, and he was reporting on a book that was
about to come out, and I read the first two chapters of the book in this
newspaper, I would want to read the rest of it.

Think about it, the first 2 chapters of the BoM are some of the most
exciting and epic, and introduce the first hero of the book, Nephi, and
his righteous parents, and evil older brothers. Nephi and his brothers
go to a rich citizen of Jerusalem, before it's destroyed, named Laban,
who had stolen some brass plates from them. Nephi finds Laban passed out
drunk and gets in an argument with God about whether or not to cut
Labans drunk fuckin head off. Nephi obeys, and puts on Labans bloody
clothes, and then tricks a servant of Laban's house to let him in to the
chamber where they keep the plates, and just fuckin walks out with them
in hand. The servant even follows him into the wilderness thinking the
whole time that it's still Laban. Then the whole family gets together
and the servant decides to stay with the outlaws. After that, Lehi,
Nephi's dad, wakes up one morning and finds a magic brass ball in front
of his tent, with two spindles on it, that point to where the family is
supposed to go, only if they're faithful enough. That is a pretty good
hook to get a person to read this crazy boring fuckin book, and Joe was
MAD at Cole for publishing it?\!?\!

We don't know the details of the interaction, but The Rise of Mormonism
finishes the interaction with;

"Joseph made a trip north from Harmony to talk to Cole and told him to
desist from publishing any more from his book. The last issue of The
Reflector that printed any text from the forthcoming BoM was an 'Extra,'
dated Jan 22, 1830. The Smiths maintained control over the printing and
sale of the book."

After that it quotes the contract that BDC signed with NSSM saying they
would split the profit of the book sales until Marty was repaid in full.

Like I said, this guy Abner Cole was a badass, and didn't really give
half a fuck about Joe's reputation. Or maybe he did, and it was his goal
to besmirch that reputation into certain obscurity. Either way, the
publication of the Palmyra Reflector, along with the standing opinions
of the Smith family with the locals, made the publication of the BoM,
and the genesis of the Mormonite religion, a challenge to Joe and
company. Joe definitely had people's ignorance and credulity on his
side, which ran rampant in that day and age, probably only slightly
moreso than today, but any person with an ounce of skepticism, could
shoot holes in Joe's theology all day long. Well, next we're going to
learn about a couple of people that lacked that singular ounce of
skepticism, but had enough credulity to fill a swimming pool.

During the time the book was being printed, Joe and his Golden Bible
were all the gossip through Palmyra and Manchester. In addition to that,
there were plenty of newspapers writing about him and his wild claims,
that were spreading the story for miles beyond that. Naturally, some
people would be curious enough to go talk to Joe and company, to find
out what the actual story was, not just what the tabloids and gossip
were passing along. Well, quite frankly, this probably had something to
do with Joe and Emma moving back to Harmony where he was less known,
while the book was being printed. What Mormons today would consider
persecution, Joe was probably enduring an onslaught of tough and
legitimate questions from pastors, historians, and any normal person
just walking down the street. 

We have record of a few of these people visiting him, but the records
that survived are mainly just meetings that affirmed the truthfulness of
the prophet in one way or another. We'll read a couple of those accounts
in a minute, but it is worth making a distinction first. It's easy to
understand why Joe was drawing so much attention. This was the burned
over district, and people loved them some new Jesus. The Millerites,
Campbellites, Seventh-Day Adventists, Anna-Baptists, and dozens of other
crazy religious sects were born in this primordial theological soup, and
Mormonism was no different. As soon as somebody had a new take on Jesus,
the people would either flock to that faction, or reject it and consider
it from the devil. Well, the reputation of the individual that created
any new Jesus, usually factored in to how successful the religious sect
was going to be. Joe had shot himself in the both feet, and stabbed
himself in the back multiple times, with all his treasure seeking and
other get-rich-quick shananigans, and he couldn't outrun his reputation
in N.Y. That's why the local newspaper articles we read considered the
whole Golden Bible story bogus, and created by the mind of a fraud.

Well, Joe's reputation did escape some people that lived outside the
reach of the negative tabloids, and ended up coming to visit the Smith
home. Of course, Joe was in Harmony at these times, but his minions had
no problem being Joe's mouthpiece to any person that was interested in
the BoM or Joe's theology.

First, we'll read the account of Thomas Baldwin Marsh. Originally from
Massachusettes, Marsh was an early convert, and faithful apostle to the
church. This is also taken from The Rise of Mormonism by H. Michael
Marquardt, and it is a first hand, autobiographical account.

"I returned back westward and found Martin Harris at the printing
office, in Palmyra, where the first sixteen pages of the BoM had just
been struck off, the proof sheet of which I obtained from the printer
and took with me. As soon as Martin Harris found out my intentions he
took me to the house of Joseph Smith, Sr. Here I found Oliver Cowdery,
who gave me all the information concerning the book I desired. After
staying there two days I started for Charleston, Mass., highly pleased
with the information I had obtained concerning the new found book."

So this guy was living in Mass., and heard somebody talking about the
Gold Bible. He must not have had anything better to do with his time,
because after hearing this, he set out on a journey to humble little
Palmyra, N.Y. Upon arriving there, he was schooled by Ollie and the
Smiths for a few days, given the first 16 pages of the BoM that had just
been completed, along with the title page, I assume, and then headed
back to Mass, to proselyte the BoM and Mormonism to the nice people
there. This was one of the first recruits to the early missionary force
of the Church of Christ. Thomas B. Marsh is a name that will come up
periodically throughout all Mormon history, so keep in, that this is
where he came from, and how he became familiar with the religion.

The next account we'll read is a little more powerful, and it's from a
man by the name of Solomon Chamberlain. This is taken from his
autobiography, and I pulled it from boap.org which is an online library
and blog run by BYU. It's kind of long, but there's a lot to unpack so
let's allow Solomon Chamberlain to speak for himself.

"About the time that Joseph Smith found the gold record, I began to feel
that the time was drawing near, that the Lord would in some shape or
other, bring forth his church. I made some inquiry through the country
where I traveled if there was any strange work of God, such as had not
been on the earth since the days of Christ. I could hear of none. I was
living about 20 miles east of where the gold record was found, on the
Erie Canal. I had occasion to go on a visit into Upper Canada. I took
\[a\] boat for Lockport, when the boat came to Palmyra, I felt as if
some genie or good spirit told me to leave the boat. This was a few
miles from where the record was found. After leaving the boat, the
spirit manifested to me, to travel a south course. I did so for about 3
miles. I had not as yet heard of the Gold Bible (so called) \[Book of
Mormon\] nor any of the \[Joseph\] Smith family. I was a stranger in
that part of the country, a town where I never before had set my foot,
and knew no one in the town."

I think this has a lot to do with Chamberlains credulity of what happens
next. This guy was on a mission from God, looking for the right church
because he was fed up with all the sects that he had joined. He was
basically wandering N.Y. Aimlessly, until he found some shit that would
actually stick, once thrown against the wall. If he had known the Smiths
and their fraudulent, treasure-seeking reputation, he probably wouldn't
have even considered their claims worth giving the time of day to. But,
he was completely ignorant of the entire Gold Bible story, and the
Smith's history in N.Y. So, he continued on his journey, and let's face
it, he was bound to find something in this search. Whether the Smiths,
Millerites, or some other religion, Chamberlain was going to find what
he was looking for, and record the situation in his autobiography. We're
just lucky for what happened next, because Chamberlain details the
stituation quite well.

"It was now about sundown, and my guide directed me to put up for the
night, which I did to a farm house. In the morning, the people of the
house asked me if I had heard of the Gold Bible \[Book of Mormon\]. When
they said Gold Bible, there was a power like electricity went from the
top of my head to the end of my toes. This was the first time I ever
heard of the Gold Bible."

Put yourself in Chamberlain's shoes. He's been searching for the truth
for some time now, having been jaded by the usual fire and brimstone
preachers that plagued the countryside. While on his journey through
N.Y., the first house he bunks at for the night, tells him about a new
Bible that's been found. Not only that, but the Bible is reportedly made
from GOLD\! And it's an ancient account of Jesus in the new world. Holy
SHIT how awesome would it be, to be Chamberlain right now?\! Not only
that, but listen to what he had to say next.

"I was now within half a mile of the Smith family where Joseph lived.
From the time I left the boat until now, I was wholly led by the Spirit
or my genie (which he also called his guide earlier). The women spoke
considerable of the Gold Bible that Joseph Smith had found. When she
mentioned Gold Bible, I felt a shock of the power of God go from head to
foot. I said to myself, "I shall soon find why I have been led in this
singular manner."

If you were Chamberlain here, wouldn't you think you had stumbled on to
God's path for you? He had been wandering, and happened upon somebody
selling a new version of Jesus, and he felt a burning in his bosom, just
like I do when I see an amazing view in Hawaii, or take a miraculously
intense shit, and he knew that this Gold Bible was his calling. Let's
continue on with Chamberlain's account here.

"I soon made my way across lots, to Father Smith's and found Hyrum
walking the floor. As I entered the door, I said, "Peace be to this
house." He looked at me as one astonished, and said, "I hope it will be
peace." I then said, "Is there anyone here that believes in visions or
revelations?" He said, "Yes, we are a visionary house." I said, "Then I
will give you one of my pamphlets, which was visionary, and of my own
experience." 

I don't think we can emphasize this conversation enough. Chamberlain
asked Hyrum if anybody in the house believed in visions or revelations,
I assume revelatory dreams were part of this too. Hyrum replied that
they were a visionary house.... Wow.... A visionary house.... When
somebody is called a visionary today, it's a derrogatory comment. It
means they see things in a vision that's separate from reality, and
shouldn't be taken seriously. But these two guys talk about it like
yesterday's breakfast. It's not hard to assume that being visionary was
something of a common topic of conversation between folks back then.
Nowadays we talk about getting those people medication, or professional
help of some sort. But, as we'll read in a second, being a visionary
household was some kind of weird social prestige, and was played and fed
on by other visionaries. It's like some kind of alternate reality circle
jerk where everybody is believing what each other says, no matter how
crazy it is.

"They then called the people together, which consisted of five or six
men who were out at the door. Father Smith was one and some of the
Whitmer's. They then sat down and read my pamphlet. Hyrum read first,
but was so affected he could not read it. He then gave it to a man,
which I learned was Christian Whitmer, he finished reading it. I then
opened my mouth and began to preach to them, in the words that the angel
had made known to me in the vision, that all churches and denominations
on the earth had become corrupt, and no church of God on the earth, but
that he would shortly raise up a church that would never be confounded
nor brought down and be like unto the Apostolic Church. They wondered
greatly who had been telling me these things, for said they we have the
same things wrote \[written\] down in our house, taken from the Gold
record, that you are preaching to us. I said, "The Lord told me these
things a number of years ago." I then said, "If you are a visionary
house, I wish you would make known some of your discoveries, for I think
I can bear them." They then made known to me that they had obtained a
gold record, and just finished translating it here. Now, the Lord
revealed to me by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost that this was the
work I had been looking for."

And there it was, typical confirmation bias. This guy was looking for a
church because all the churches so far were wrong. Joe was in the
process of creating a church because all the churches so far were wrong,
and these individuals came together to make a perfect match. Is it
really that miraculous? Coincidences like this happen all the time.
People are always looking for something, and other people usually have
that something that's being sought for. When those people meet up, it's
not because the stars aligned and god led them both to the same place at
the same time. It's just a matter of probabilities. Eventually everybody
will find something they're looking for, that somebody else has,
especially when it's something that's as vaguely defined as religion, or
a god claim. Mormons can use this as evidence that god was working in
the lives of these men, but I'm sorry, it's pretty mundane and lame for
a god to be involved in this situation. Random chance can be a
fascinating field of study, especially when you try to add a mettling
god into the mix. Or we can be realistic, and take a step back and say,
"well, somebody was going to believe early Mormonism, and we are just
lucky enough to have the autobiography of one of the people that did
believe."

Let's finish up with Solomon Chamberlain here, because there's one big
thing we need to discuss before closing up the history portion of
today's episode.

"Here I stayed 2 days and they instructed me, in the manuscripts of the
Book of Mormon. After I had been here two days, I went with Hyrum and
some others to Palmyra printing office where they began to print the
Book of Mormon, and as soon as they had printed 64 pages, I took them
with their leave and pursued my journey to Canada, and I preached all
that I knew concerning Mormonism, to all both high and low, rich and
poor, and thus you see this was the first that ever printed Mormonism
was preached to this generation."

I hate to rain on his parade, but the other account we read by Thomas
Marsh happened before this chronologically, and he only took 16 pages of
print to go proselyte in Mass., because that's all that had been
completed by the time he left. But, Chamberlain was probably the first
to go up to Canada to preach Mormonism, so I suppose we can give him
that. Anyway, we'll hear more about Chamberlain if he makes himself
relevant in the future, but for now that'll do. These were some amazing
and compelling accounts by these two seekers, that is, if we factor out
the whole thing about random chance and stuff, but let's get into what
Joe was up to during this time.

For this information, we'll be turning to an interview that Hiram Page
gave to William E. McLellin in 1848. It sheds some very interesting
light on Joe's opinion of his own book and true motives, and I think it
allows us to get inside Joe's head for a short time. This is also taken
from The Rise of Mormonism page 153-54, but was originally pulled from a
photocopy of the original handwritten interview in the RLDS archives in
Missouri.

"Joseph heard that there was a chance to sell a copyright in Canada for
any useful book that was used in the states. Joseph thought this would
be a good opportunity to get a handsome sum of money which was to be
(after the expenses were taken out) for the exclusive benefit of the
Smith family and was to be at the disposal of Joseph accordingly Oliver
Cowdery, Joseph Knight, Hiram Page, and Josiah Stowell were chosen (as I
understood by revelation) to do the business; we were living from some
30 to 100 miles apart the necessary preperation was mady by them in a
sly manner So as to keep Martin Harris from drawing a share of the
money, it was told me we were to go by revelation but when we assembled
at father Smiths; there was no revelation for us to go but we were all
anxious to get a revelation to go; and when it came we were to go to
Kingston where we were to sell if they would not harden their hearts;
but when we got there; there was no purchaser neither were they
authorized at Kingston to buy rights for the province; but Little York
was the place where such business had to be done; we were to get 8,000
dollars we were treated with the best of respects by all we met with in
Kingston – by the above we may learn how a revelation may be received
and the person receiving it not be benefited."

So what the hell did we just read? Basically, Joe tried to sell the
copyright for the BoM in Canada for 8,000 dollars, while the book was
still being printed. Joe wouldn't make the trek himself, he had better
things to do, so he gathered 4 of his minons, Ollie Cowdung Allover,
Joseph Knight Sr., Hiram Page, and Bossman Josiah Stowell, and they all
collected enough provisions and some change for their travels, and
headed to the Smiths house in Palmyra, where Joe gathered with them at
the time. It's unclear whether Joe was living in Harmony or Palmyra at
this time, but we are certain that they gathered at Father Smith's
house. The 4 cronies were under the impression that Joe had a line on
somebody that was willing to buy the copyright, and they expected a
revelation from God to be waiting for them, when they gathered at the
Smith's, that would detail where they needed to go, and who they needed
to talk to. You can only imagine the depression and anxiety that ran
through the group when they found out that no such revelation existed.
The group basically refused to leave until Joe tossed Precious in Mr.
Hat, and gave them the revelation they were looking for. 

They did all of this without alerting NSSM, because if he found out that
Joe was trying to sell the copyright out from under him, it would ruin
Joe's reputation and convictions in Marty's eyes, and Marty might cut
off funding the book. Besides, there was nothing saying that the Smith's
had to repay Marty for the book, if they didn't own the rights to the
book, so that 8,000 would have been Joe's free and clear, legally
speaking, had everything worked out in Joe's favor. So the group left
without Marty's knowledge, and headed for Kingston Canada, which is just
on the Northeast Canada side of Lake Ontario from the Palmyra/Rochester
area N.Y., a couple days journey by foot and ferry. When the group got
there, supposedly under assignment from God, nobody there knew what the
fuck they were talking about. The people there couldn't even figure out
who they needed talked to, in order to get that 8,000 dollar figure, and
just sent the group packing to another part of Canada called Little
York. After that, we don't know if the group just returned to N.Y., or
if they went to Little York to procure the moneys, but we do know that
they returned empty handed. I think the platitude, that Hiram Page
closed his remarks with, sums it up nicely, "by the above we may learn
how a revelation may be received and the person receiving it not be
benefited." So at least the 4 guys had a good time while in Canada, and
if that's the only benefit that can be taken from this week that was
wasted on chasing a wild goose, then it's just alright in Hiram's book. 

But, Joe wasn't satisfied with this utter failure, and he organized a
second trip, presumably without the knowledge of NSSM once again. This
was in a letter from William E. McLellin to Joseph Smith III, written in
1872, so a while after the fact, but it still holds a lot of relevance
because it's written by one of the primary church historians for the
RLDS. We'll get into McLellin when he makes his way into the church in
1831, but for now, we can take what he says with a fair amount of
credibility. 

"But again, Joseph Smith had a revelation for Oliver Cowdery and friends
to go to Canada to get a copyright secured in that Dominion to the Book
of Mormon. It proved so false that he never would have it recorded,
printed or published, I have seen and read a copy of it, so that I know
it existed."

Basically, Joe gathered everybody together again, and once again issued
a revelation using his best buddies, Precious and Mr. Hat, telling the
group that this time they would totally be successful. That 8 grand must
have had Joe's mouth watering by now. If we calculate that out to
today's inflation, it would be just over 205,000 dollars. It's no wonder
Joe was trying to get this done. If he were successful in selling the
copyright, it would set him, and the entire smith family, up for the
rest of their lives. Put yourself in his shoes. What's easier,
publishing the Book of Mormon, starting your own religion, having your
cult chased out of multiple towns and cities, push through multiple
hardships of money and other necessities, and end up ultimately getting
shot like a rat in a cage in Carthage? Or just making up a book, and
selling the copyright to somebody else for some fat stacks and quick
payoff? Which would you do? Which do you think was really Joe's plan
from the beginning? Well, unfortunately, nobody will ever get to see the
revelations that he issued regarding these trips to Canada. They were so
embarrasingly false that he refused to print or publish them, which is a
damn shame because, from a scholarly perspective, I would love to read
those revelations. And from a non-scholarly perspective, I would just
love to read them so I could call Joe a bold-faced, egotistical,
underhanded, liar. But, I suppose I can still do that without reading
the false revelations.

To sum it all up, D-Day David Whitmer wrote in An Address to All
Believers in Christ this little gem that offers a view into Joe's
personality.

"Joseph was at my father's house when they returned. (meaning the group
that went to Canada the second time) I was there also, and am an eye
witness to these facts. Jacob Whitmer and John Whitmer were also present
when Hiram Page and Oliver Cowdery returned from Canada. Well, we were
all in great trouble; and we asked Joseph how it was that he had
received a revelation from the Lord for some brethren to go to Toronto
and sell the copyright, and the brethren had utterly failed in their
understanding. Joseph did not know how it was, so he enquired of the
Lord about it, and behold the following revelation came through the
stone: "Some revelations are of God: some revelations are of man: and
some revelations are of the Devil." So we see that the revelation to go
to Toronto and sell the copyright was not of God, but was of the devil
or of the heart of man."

How the fuck was this not a huge red flag to everybody in the room. They
had gone twice to Canada to try and sell the rights to publishing the
book, and twice failed. Both times the group was working from
revelations from the Almighty God of the universe, spoken through his
earthly conduit, Joseph Smith, and Joe just comes up with a new
revelation from precious, saying that some revelations are from God, and
others aren't. How could they possibly trust this narcissitic, lying
asshole after something like that?\! If Joe was waving a red flag that
big and bright in the face of his followers, and they still continued to
follow him, I have very little sympathy for whatever happened to them
after that. This was a cop-out, and a really poor, makeshift one at
that. 

Well, with these failures of trying to get rich quick, Joe was forced to
follow through with publishing the BoM, and establishing his church. In
this episode, we covered the timeline from NSSM signing the agreement
with Egbert B. Grandin for publishing the BoM in August 1829, and moved
all the way through the sequence of events until the Book of Mormon was
first offered for sale on March 26, 1830, 11 days before the first
congregation of the church. We're almost 9 months in to this bimonthly
podcast, and the timeline has finally advanced to the point that the
Book of Mormon was actually published, and ready to spread, like the
newest wildfire to scorch the burned over district with Joe's radical
new claims on God and mortality. Things are about to get really
exciting.

Before getting into the listener mail segment and Patreon shout outs, I
want to talk a little about the plans for the show. This is episode 20,
and with the community that has evolved around the show, I want to just
say thank you to everybody that's listening, and contributing in some
way. The facebook page is a central hub for really crazy Mormon shit,
I'm constantly getting encouraging emails, and patronage is higher than
it's ever been, so just thank you so much everybody. I know some shows
have been better than others, and when I go back and listen to the first
episodes, I just cringe and laugh at what I'm hearing. The show has come
a long way, and I plan on sticking to my guns to perpetuate it's growth
and presence in the podcasting world. That being said, I hope that all
the listeners have come to some kind of understanding about the pace of
the show. Honestly, with how much information is out there on Mormon
church history, and with how much depth I like to examine things, this
could truly be a never ending endeavor. Like I said earlier, 9 months
in, and all we've covered so far is timid little swindler Joe getting
his precious little book up and running, by any means necessary. We've
only introduced a small fraction of the important characters up to this
point, and there are quite a few people I've left out, just for the sake
of not confusing the equation too much. With what's coming up in the
history, it'll make everything up to this point seem as lame as a carrot
stuck in a vat of green Jell-o. But, the problem with examining
everything with as much detail as we do, we run into a bit of a
catch-22. What I mean is, there's a lot of really amazing, and dark
things in the history of the church, but a lot of them don't come up for
a long time, if we stick to a linear timeline format. For example, the
horrible Mountain Meadows Massacre didn't happen until 13 years after
Joe's death, and Joe dies in 14 years from where the timeline currently
stands. I want the information about what happened during these horrible
times to be available to all, but it seems out of place to have an
episode about something that happened 27 years ahead of where we are
right now, just plopped somewhere randomly in between other historical
episodes that are following the timeline. Even more than the exciting
things in the history, I also want to cover current Mormon news topics.
For example, last week Boyd K. Packer, one of the most virulent
homophobes in the apostleship, died at the age of 90. I want to do an
episode covering his life and some of his more memorable sermons, but
I'm not sure where to fit it in, or if everybody would even be
interested in an episode like that. So I'm petitioning all listeners for
their opinion. Would everybody prefer that I occassionally take a break
from the historoical timeline to do some special edition episodes on
these topics, or do you just want to wait for the timeline to get there
and it'll be covered with the highest level of detail that's been
devoted to the timeline up to this point. Honestly, I see pros and cons
with doing it both ways, but I'm sure there's a middle ground there that
will satisfy the majority of listeners. Personally, I think these topics
can be covered with some special edition episodes, and examined in much
more depth when it comes up in the timeline. For example, we could do a
single special edition episode about just the MMM, but then when it
comes up in the timeline, we could spend 2 or 3 episodes on it covering
the politics, event, and aftermath in much greater detail. That seems
like it could be the most beneficial, but I'm looking for any possible
way to keep the show interesting, and relevant at the same time. We want
your suggestions, so please go to the facebook page and leave a comment
or message, or you can email directly to <nakedmormonism@gmail.com> if
you have any ideas about how to make the show better in this respect, or
in any way for that matter. I'm always open to suggestions, and am
looking forward to communicating with the listeners to hopefully improve
the show.

That being said, there was some listener mail to take care of.

Next, I wanted to thank our newest patrons.

There are some new NaMo Juvenile Delinquints to thank. Isabelle, David
L., and Deeewayne, thank you all so much for your support. Your journey
through the ranks of the NaMo kingdom are off to a great start. Also,
Isabelle sent an email saying that she enjoys the show, and has a
podcast of her own. It's called "Le Monde Merveilleux du Scepticisme''
meaning The Wonderful World of Skepticism. It's in French, so if any
listeners understand French, and want to hear Isabelle's take on
skepticism, head over to her show. Sorry that I won't be listening to
your show Isabelle, but, like I said, I can't French for shit.

Next there were a few NaMo Adolescent Rebels to thank. Grey, Daniel, and
Don. Thank you all so much for your support. You guys are exactly 0
percent more or less awesome than Juvenile Delinquints, but exactly 100
percent more supportive, and for that reason, you'll always have a
special place in the heart of the podcast. I really appreciate your
generosity.

Next to thank, are the newest NaMo Apostates. David, and Nicholas. These
gentlemen saw the preceding levels of NaMo glory, and decided that they
just weren't enough to truly capture how amazing and epic they really
are. Thank you guys for being a 5<sup>th</sup> pillar of the show, and
helping to support the time and research that goes into the show. Your
donations help to fund the NaMo information kingdom into perpetuity, and
for that you have my undying gratitude.

Things are all good and well in the realm of reality, but there's a new
presence in the NaMo Outer Darkness realm. Mary is a hard-working
professional, that doesn't like to have any down-time in her life. She
coaches the local recreational soccer team, she's head of the
communities school council, and she's a volunteer fire-fighter. She's
always had a talented, go-getter of a personality that people are
magnetised to. 

Small town communities are a gift in some ways. Everybody knows
everybody, and you never have to go far to run into a genuinely good
friend. That's the spirit of community that drives Mary to be on the
volunteer fire department for the community. 

The unfortunate part of being on the VFD, is the inherent risks that
come with fighting fires. There's simply no escaping that fact. However,
the rewarding sense attained when somebody's life is saved by Mary's
actions, motivates her to stare firey death in the face, without so much
as a flinch.

It's been a couple of weeks since she's been called to a house fire, and
Mary knows that one has to happen sooner or later. The weather's been
hot and dry, and it's just a matter of time until a flicked cigarette
butt, or backyard grilling party goes awry. 

Well, it happened on Mary's fateful translation night. She had just
finished making dinner for herself when the call rang out. There was a
condo fire just down the street from Mary's home. She knew the family
that was inside, as they had been the first people to bring over a plate
of cookies when she moved into the neighborhood years ago. Mary
cherished their friendship, and couldn't stand the thought of any of
them being in danger. Mary suited up in her firefighting garb, and ran
out the door, leaving her dinner to get cold on the table. She ran down
the street toward the blazing inferno that used to be a home. She looked
in all directions around the house, and couldn't see the family
anywhere. Their car was in the driveway, but none of them were standing
outside watching the house burn to the ground. A sinking fear settled
into the pit of Mary's stomach, what if the family's still inside? 

Her worst fear was confirmed when she heard a support beam from the
roof, crash to the floor of the condo, and she heard a little girl
scream out of fright. Mary was frozen, if somebody didn't act fast, the
entire family stuck inside would be consumed before the fire-trucks even
got there to put the fire out. Against her better judgement, Mary pulled
her helmet's plastic shield down to guard her beautiful face, and
stunning eyes, from any damage during the heroic stunt she was about to
attempt.

She runs at the door, dropping her shoulder into a full charge. She
smashes through the front door and tucks into a perfect roll onto the
kitchen tile. She gets up to a crouch, and her mind grasps the severity
of the fire. Every single flat surface was ablaze. All the windows had
been cooked out of their panes, fueling the fire with fresh oxygen to
burn. There were wall studs falling from their place in the sheetrock.
Roof joists were crashing through the ceiling with loud snaps and bangs.
Everything was going up in flames, and the house would be completely
consumed in less than a minute.

Mary calls out to the family, and hears a faint cry for help coming from
the back bedroom. Mary charges through the falling debris, and drops her
shoulder in for another slam. This door isn't as brittle as the front
door was, and doesn't budge with her shoulder-charge. She grabs the
doorhandle, and her glove melts to the red hot metal. She takes her hand
out of the gloves to keep it safe from being melted to the door just
like the glove was, and without missing a beat, Mary grabs the small
hatchet from her tool belt. She takes a wild swing at the wood panel
door, right next to the handle, and inflicts a small wound to the wood,
just to the side of the handle. That wasn't enough, and she knew it. The
danger of the situation really starts to kick in, as she hears the
family screaming behind the door. A massive rush of adrenaline pumps
into Mary's veins, and she takes a second swing at the door. The wood
around the handle splinters into a useless pile of broken wood, and Mary
kicks the door open with heroic force. The family looks up at Mary
stunned by her amazing display of power. She yells at them to get a move
on and follow her. The family falls into line behind Mary as she leads
them through the smoldering house to the front door. She stands at the
doorway and pushes each person out the front door, to ensure their
safety, and get a count on everybody. 

As the whole family, down to the last child runs through the flaming
doorway to the safe outdoors, Mary's heart sinks again. Somebody is
missing from the group. Mary follows the family outside and yells to
them asking about little Todd. They tell her they don't know but they
think he's inside. Mary doesn't wait for a second, and runs back into
the inferno. There are sirens down the road, but they still wouldn't get
here in time to help save little Todd. She yells for him, and listens
for a response. There's a muffled yell in the smaller bedroom next to
the one she broke into earlier. The smoke is so thick, but Mary's on top
of her game. She knows right where to go to find the terrified child.
Mary wasn't going to worry about wasting time with the hatchet, she
instead kicks the door as soon as she reaches the room. Weakened so much
by the fire, the door flies off it's hinges and tumbles into the smoke
filled room. 

In Mary's experience, she knows that kids hide in closets when they're
afraid. She enters the room and turns to the left to find the closet
door closed. She hears a whimpering Todd behind it and knows she's found
her target. Without any care for the use of her hand, Mary grabs the
door handle and twists, to fling the door open. Huddled in a tiny ball
on the floor, is a terrified little Todd, and Mary's heart instantly
skips a beat. He's going to be okay if they can just get out of the
house. 

Mary bends over and picks up Todd, whose frozen from fear, and spins
around toward the open bedroom door. She tries to lunge out of the frame
that used to house a bedroom door, but there's a loud crash. A 500 lb.
burning support joist falls from the ceiling, and smashes to the floor
right in front of Mary. She pauses as the fear of mortality overcomes
her adrenaline high for a split second.

She can't let fear of death cause both her and Todd to die tonight, and
Mary suppresses the doubts, long enough to jump over the burning joist,
and run into the kitchen. The smoke is so thick now, it's impossible to
see where Mary's going. She's making her way to the front door from what
she remembers of the house before. A loud crack over Mary's head
overpowers the sounds of the burning inferno, and time slows to a
fraction of normal speed. Everything is happening so slowly, and Mary
can comprehend her thoughts so clearly. There's even a break in the
smoke where she can see the open front door a mere 10 feet away. The
loud crack overhead was another support joist giving in to the weakening
force of the fire. As Mary is running to the front door with Todd
securely in her arms, the burning joist crashes through the ceiling.
Mary was able to get most of her body out of the way, but the massive
beam falls on top of Mary's calf muscle, pinning her to the ground. She
shakes Todd and tells him to run for the door. She could tell he was
disoriented, and they had no time to lose. She sets him down on his back
on the tile floor, and shoves him across the floor as hard as she can.
Todd slides to the open door, jumps up, and runs to the safety of his
parent's open arms.

But our Hero is still trapped. She can't free her leg. She lays on her
back to try and push it off with the free leg, but the joist is simply
too heavy. Mary comes to grips with the fact that she may have
sacrificed her life to save that small child. A simple peace overcomes
the adrenaline coursing through her veins, and Mary looks around at the
burning inferno that would undoubtedly become her resting place.
Everything was happening so slowly, and Mary began to contemplate life
in general. She came to an understanding, that this life is all we have,
and that's just fine. If we can devote our lives to helping each other,
that can be reason enough to live. She had given her life for the sake
of many others, and she was okay with this being her final moment of
glory. 

Just as this thought crossed Mary's mind, another roof support beam
cracks right above her head. This was the end. Another loud crack, and
the ceiling gave way above her head. She watched in slow motion as the
sheetrock above her head exploded under the weight of the beam. It was
falling straight down, and was about to crush her once and for all. Mary
put up one hand, and turned her head to the side, in a feutal effort to
stop the inevitable. Just as she turned her head, she saw something that
was brighter and more enchanting than anything else in the room. Mary no
longer thought of her own life, but was completely absorbed by the
beauty and mysteriousness of this glowing talisman floating just above
the ground right next to her face. What is it? What could it mean? JMS
was very pleased with the selfless actions Mary had just displayed, and
whispered in the Sinister Small voice, "Take it". Mary reached out and
grabbed the glowing talisman, and there was nothing but silence.

The beam crashed down right on where Mary was trapped, and the rest of
the building folded like a plastic bag in the fire. The neighbors were
screaming for Mary, but no cries of agony would be heard from the house
tonight. Nobody will ever know exactly what happened to Mary. All that
would be found of her, was her name badge torn from the sleeve of her
firefighting suit, charred, but still legible right where she laid
before her translation. 

Thank you for your support Mary, and welcome to the Outer Darkness, as
our newest NaMo Demon. Your support is deeply appreciated, and will go a
long way to help keep the show going. Thank you for being so awesome and
for listening to the show.
