---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 21 - 1 Prophet, 2 Trials... 3-some anybody?
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-21-1-prophet-2-trials-3-anybody/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-21-1-prophet-2-trials-3-some-anybody
libsyn_embed: 3735850

category: History
date: 2015-08-13 21:31:12 PDT
---

Episode 21 – 1 Prophet, 2 Trials... 3-some anybody?

On this episode, we dive right back into the history\! We find ourselves
attending the first two congregations of the church, and take a brief
moment to introduce a pre-Danite wild-card that's been unfairly benched
during our narrative up to this point. After that, Joe takes a trip to
Colesville and has his second and third run-ins with the N. Y. legal
system. Does Joe get convicted of being a “disorderly person”, or does
he get off on a couple of bullshit technicalities? Listen to find out...

Website nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music used with permission   

Links:

1830 trial notes

<http://user.xmission.com/~research/early/court1830.htm> 

Salt Lake Tribune 'Seer Stone' article

<http://www.sltrib.com/news/2802019-155/mormon-church-to-release-more-documents>

Grant Palmer presentation

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHsvZooc4Bc> 

Janice transition blog entry

<http://choppedliverproductions.com/about/Mormon.html> 

Welcome to episode 21 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, I'm Bryce
Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me. 

Last episode was a little step out of the normal history. It was time to
give Boyd K. Packer the proper eulogy that he so thoroughly deserved. I
grabbed three of his more famous talks and read the majority of their
content to try and get a proper understanding of this man's views on
sexuality in general, and everything relating to it. I hope the episode
didn't get too personal at the end. I've spent a lot of time with you
guys by this point, and I felt like I should let you in on my Mormon
experience a little more than I have in the past. It's quite apparent
that I hold a bit of frustration with the church's stances on sexuality,
and I kind of let that frustration take it's own course, and direct the
content of my rantings. Not only that, but the episode was filled with
ad-homonym attacks and name calling. It came to my attention from a few
people, that some of the names I called BKP might have been a bit
offensive. Names like Boyd KKK. Fudge-Packer, and Boyd K. Pack-it in the
ass, and just outright dicklicker. I'm well aware of how offensive these
names can be, so, to anybody that did take offense, I apologize. It was,
and is, never my intention to offend or hurt anybody with what I say on
this show. I like to be offensive in the scope of the show, but I mean
absolutely no harm to anybody directly, with the exception of the
relevant people we talk about in the show. I have no problem calling Joe
the megalomaniacal, child-fucking, self-righteous, pile of human waste
that he was. Or calling Boyd K. Packer the disconnected, fearmongering,
misogynistic, gay-hating, fuckwit that he was, but I try to stop the
insults and ad-homonym attacks there.

There were a few reasons I was so offensive, one of which was to poke
the dead bear. You see, the most offensive thing you can do to a violent
homophobe, is libelously call them various offensive terms for being
gay. The best way to highlight somebody's bigotry is by shining a
spotlight on how offended a person like that is, when the names are
turned around and used on them. I think I was doing just that, in an
effort to make a homophobic person like Packer uncomfortable by calling
him what he hates most. It shows a problem with their perspective, not
with society's perspective. I would never actually call somebody that's
gay, one of these horrible names. I hope that hearing those phrases
didn't turn anybody off of the rest of the show, because by the end of
it, I tried to express just how pro-gay I am. I would never dream of
saying something offensive like that, in an effort to offend anybody
that's gay. Or, for that matter, anybody that's straight and sympathizes
with the LGBT movement like myself. Unintentional collateral offense is
never my intention with this show.

The second reason for calling these names was just out of sheer
frustration. In reading those talks, I created a cardboard version of
Packer that I couldn't help but verbally stab a bunch of times for
saying such insensitive, and horrible things. As I made apparent in the
episode, I had a hard time controlling how angry the content made me,
because I empathize so much with the people he marginalized during the
talks. It was childish and petulant, but I don't think it was
unjustified. 

I think another reason, which I sort of eluded to during the closing
rant was the fact that I was raised with terms like this being normal,
calling my buddy names for killing me in Call of Duty. I knew that he
wasn't gay, and therefore probably didn't suck cocks, and I was fairly
certain that he didn't make a habit of fucking his mother, or being a 6
foot tall excretory organ, but I still called him a cocksucking,
mutherfuckin asshole for scoring a cross-map headshot on me. Anybody
that's played any first person shooter with a notorious screen-peeker
has said many similar things. These were never exchanged in genuine
anger or meant to be truly offensive to the other person, it was merely
done out of a weird sense of joking that's exchanged between men
everyday. I'm a delivery truck driver that spends my working day going
from one auto repair shop to the next diesel repair shop in very rural
parts of Colorado, Wyoming, and Nebraska. If you don't have a vocabulary
and skin that can handle and return these words, you're seen as a pinko
commy hippie obama lover, and you will not survive, especially as a
salesman. I'm not trying to shift the blame onto my past or current
situation, but I moved from a very conservative suburb of Salt Lake
City, to very conservative rural Colorado, and I just described my job.
I don't spend much time around very many people that I would consider
enlightened. This show has been my first access to that world and group
of people. The problem with this is I don't always have a baseline of
reality to ground my speech and mannerisms upon. I mean, for fucks sake,
I went to bed just after midnight both nights of ReasonCon because I
haven't really partied before. Mormonism made me into a fucking weird
young adult.

The culmination of these many compounding reasons is what made me say
such things. I'm not trying to justify it, because I know I should never
have said what I did, in the way that I did. Saying those things was
completely my responsibility, and was never my intention and I'm sorry.
I hope all you listeners can accept my apology with the understanding
that I will be more careful from now on with how I express my
frustration at ass - backwards world views, held by really fucked up
people like Boyd K. Packer and Joseph Smith. I do appreciate the
corrections. They help me become a better person, and make the show more
listener friendly.  

Now for the fun stuff that everybody comes to this show for. The history
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Let's get a quick
refresher course on what the last historical episode was about. Last
time we were talking about Joe and Co., they had signed the contract
with E.B. Grandin to publish 5,000 copies of the BoM for 3,000 dollars.
While Ollie and John Whitmer were slaving away to compose the printer's
manuscript, and John H. Gilbert was madly setting the type and printing,
Joe fucked off to Harmony to go live with the in-laws again.

Sometime during this period, Joe heard about a publishing company in
Canada that was willing to pay a very handsome 8,000 dollars for any
book that could be useful, whatever that meant, and he wanted some of
that cheddar. He gathered a few of his favorite gents, minus
Not-So-Smarty-Marty of course, and gave them revelation to go sell the
copyright. It failed the first time, I know, hard to believe that one of
Joe's revelations from god failed or was inaccurate, but Joe wouldn't be
dismayed by this little speed-bump. He called for the same group of
buddies to go on a second trip to Canada, once again by revelation from
God, and the group failed a second time. Amazing isn't it. It's just sad
that we don't have a copy of the revelation itself. We know that both
trips happened, and their purpose from multiple first hand accounts, but
Joe wouldn't let the revelation be printed because it was such a massive
embarrassment to him that the revelation was such a failure.

After these multiple failed revelations, a guy named Abner Cole printed
a satirical version of the Book of Mormon under the pen-name Obadiah
Dogberry, called the Book of Pukei. He also unlawfully printed the first
two chapters of the BoM, which finally made Joe and Co. take notice, and
have a little talk with Mr. Dogberry. Soon after this talk, the
plagiarism and copyright infringement stopped, however the ridicule did
not. There is plenty more out there, from other newspapers, and multiple
other sources, that considered Joe and his gold bible that he found with
his magic stone precious, to be a complete farcical, and nefarious
fraud. Joe was pretty much universally considered a piece of shit by
anybody that wasn't in his company, or didn't have some way of
benefiting from believing his story, or being part of the early
Mormonite movement. 

Well, after talking about the Book of Pukei, we concluded the episode by
saying this was the end of the road leading up to the Church of Christ
being started, and the beginning of Joe's journey to full-blown cult
leader. We bumped right up to the first congregation of the church which
was held on April 6, 1830. Well, that's where we begin today's episode,
along with the introduction of a character that we've ignored for far
too long. So let's get into it.

This was a pretty eventful day for Joe and his friends. We know the
major parts of what happened that day, however there are some minutia
that are controversial. One problem is the number of people in the
congregation. Some have recorded that there may have been as many as 30
people gathered together there, whereas the church reports 6 active
members on that day. Another issue is the location. The church tells us
that it was organized in the Whitmer home in Fayette, N.Y., however
others argue that it was organized in or near the Smith home in the
Manchester/Palmyra area. Like I said, small details. Details that don't
necessarily change anything important about the occurrences on that day.

For our purposes, we're going to stick primarily with the report from
history of the church, Vol. 1, thanks again Jay for sending a copy of
this to me, it's absolutely invaluable. This episode will be quoting
straight from it, pages 75-94.

“We had received a commandment to organize the church; and accordingly
we met together for that purpose, at the house of Mr. Peter Whitmer,
Sen., (being six in number,) on Tuesday, the sixth day of April, A.D.,
one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Having opened the meeting by
solemn prayer to our heavenly father, we proceeded, according to
previous commandment, to call on our brethren to know whether they
accepted us as their teachers in the things of the Kingdom of God, and
whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a
church according to said commandment which we had received. To these
several propositions they consented by a unanimous vote. I then laid my
hands upon Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an Elder of the “Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;” after which, he ordained me also to
the office of an Elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed it,
and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them.
We then laid our hands on each individual member of the church present,
that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed
members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us
to a very great degree--- some prophesied, whilst we all praised the
Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly.”

Alright, let's talk about this for a minute. Naturally, the meeting was
opened with a prayer, that's to be perfectly expected, but the next
thing they do is what I'm interested in. They “called on our brethren to
know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the kingdom of god,
and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized
as a church”. When I was young in the church, I always wondered why we
would do that thing right before the sacrament service where they would
call people and ask the congregation to sustain or oppose the person's
calling or appointment. Once every six months during general conference,
some dude in a $900 suit will stand at the pulpit in the conference
center and ask all the members to sustain the current leadership, which
is basically just raising your hand saying you support whatever it is
they just said. I suppose it's always an option to oppose whatever they
are calling your support for, but that's relatively unheard of until
recently with the any opposed movement. You never knew the church was
such a democratic structure did ya? Anyway, I remember thinking a few
times that it was so weird, but it was also just what everybody in the
church was doing, so I didn't ever seriously question it. It seems like
this might be the genesis of this practice. At the very first
congregation of the church, Joe called for a vote from everybody in the
room, asking if they supported Joe and Ollie as their teachers, and
agreed with the direction the church was going. I suppose I see the
point of this effort. If any member isn't satisfied, they can just vote
against supporting a motion, and the motion needs to be adopted or
changed in order to obtain satisfaction. I suppose that's more of a
republic, than a democracy, but it still surprises me that in it's very
early stages, the church was practicing this, and it's still part of
every LDS church's agenda every week. Just a heads up, you don't
oppose.... simple as that.... you don't oppose...

Next thing to address is Joe and Ollie's little mutual masturbordination
into the office of Elder in the church. The footnotes of the history of
the church that I'm reading from, which were added many years later,
vehemently distinguish this ordination apart from Joe and Ollie
receiving the Melchizedik priesthood, so it can fit better in their
narrative. However, from reading the recorded history up to this point
and ignoring the footnotes, it seems a lot like Joe considered the
office of Elder synonymous with the M priesthood. In fact, the M
priesthood hadn't even been referred to up to this point. It was just
the holy priesthood in reference to the Aaronic priesthood, and then the
office of Elder, which, nowadays, has the added bonus of the M
priesthood, added much later than what's recorded here. Check out
Episode 19 for a full deconstruction of the massive fuster-cluck of
confused timelines and verbiage when it comes to the priesthoods. Just
keep in mind, when the church was first organized, Elder was considered
the highest office for a person to reach in the priesthood, with the
exception of Joe, which is what we'll talk about next.

Back to quoting from History of the Church vol. 1. Keep in mind the
perspective given by Joseph being the mouthpiece of god when he gave
revelations.

“Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment:

Behold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shall be
called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and
elder of the church through the will of God the Father and the grace of
your Lord Jesus Christ. 

Being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to
build it up unto the most holy faith.”

Basically, everybody in the congregation got something cool for being
there. Joe and Ollie ordained each other to the office of Elder, then
every person voted on their holiness, and thus received the ordination
blessing of the Holy Ghost, and everybody was happy. But, Joe couldn't
stay on the same level as all the other people in his burgeoning cult,
he needed some way to distinguish himself above all the other fools in
that room. So, Joe received a convenient revelation from God that set
him apart as seer, translator, prophet, and apostle of Jesus Christ.
That was a title that nobody, not even Ollie Cowdung Allover, had. Joe
had officially set himself up as king shit of crazyville in just a few
sentences. Welcome to the first official authority claim of our favorite
cult leader, Joseph Smith.

Going back to history of the church vol. 1 page 79

“We now proceeded to call out and ordain some others of the brethren to
different offices of the Priesthood, according as the spirit manifested
unto us: and after a happy time spent in witnessing and feeling for
ourselves the powers and blessings of the Holy Ghost, through the grace
of god bestowed upon us, we dismissed with the pleasing knowledge that
we were now individually member of, and acknowledged of God, “The Church
of Jesus Christ,” organized in accordance with commandments and
revelations given by Him to ourselves in these last days, as well as
according to the Church as recorded in the New Testament. Several
persons who had attended the above meeting, became convinced of the
truth and came forward shortly after, and were received into the Church;
among the rest my own father and mother were baptized, to my great joy
and consolation; and about the same time, Martin Harris and Orrin Porter
Rockwell.”

Before we get to the last person on that list, let's talk about the
other three people. Apparently, Joe was convincing enough with his
revelations and other speeches during this first congregation, that both
his parents and NSSM were baptized into the church. That's important for
a certain level of validation that Joe had been seeking for a long time.
Obviously, Joe looked up to his parents, especially his magical father,
BDC, who was obviously Joe's namesake. I mean, at the time of recording
this, I'm the same age that Joe was when he was conducting this meeting,
and he had the implicit approval of his parents, and crazy-ass,
bi-polar, deer whisperer NSSM. What a rock solid validation, right? Even
being his age, I can't put myself in his shoes for gaining that level of
validation from the people that cared most about him. Before moving on
to OPR, let me list off the official list of the 6 members in that first
congregation. There was Joe, Ollie Cowdung, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer
Jun., Samuel Smith, and D-Day David Whitmer. That list was given by
Ollie to Joseph Knight Sr., who'll come up really soon. This attendance
list seems to lack the names of the individuals baptized on that day.
They must have only counted the members that had already been baptized
or something, because it doesn't make a lot of sense if BDC, Lucy Smith,
and NSSM were baptized that day, but weren't there to be baptized. The
same goes for OPR. It's starting to seem like the history, as recorded
by the church, doesn't quite match up to reality in this case, but I
don't know... I wasn't there to judge the accuracy of the record. I
wonder what else is wrong with it. We'll get into that question in a
while, but first OPR.

Orrin Porter “destroying muthafuckin angel” Rockwell was born in
Belchertown, Massachusetts on June 28, 1813 to Orin and Sarah Rockwell
and soon moved to Palmyra, N.Y. In mid 1818, the Smith family moved to
Palmyra, N.Y., to the farm adjacent to the Rockwell farm. Orrin was 8
years younger than Joseph, but the boys shared some things in common.
During the first episode of this show, we talked about Joe having
surgery on his infected leg bone, due to a bone infection from typhoid
fever. It was an experimental procedure that involved opening up the
leg, and scraping away the infected bone. This left Joe with a long
recovery time in his youth, all the way up to his early teenage years.
Joe had a limp until the day he died thanks to that operation, however,
he didn't die from infection, so it was a life saving procedure. Well,
Orrin had a similar experience. However, he didn't have a leg infection
that required a major surgery, he just severely broke his leg at the age
of 10, and had it set, and placed in a makeshift cast by a shitty
physician. This cast allowed Orrin to heal, however the leg healed and
ended up 2 inches shorter than the other leg. This forever gave Orrin a
limp as well, making it something the boys shared with each other, and
could bond over. In fact, Orrin's 2 inch difference was problematic
enough that he wasn't very useful for some farming tasks. For example,
when plowing, he could never plow in a straight line. He thought he was,
but when somebody would come along to check his work, all the lines
leaned one direction a tiny bit, making an unruly mess of the field. 

Even given the age difference, Joe and Orrin became the best of friends.
While Joe was more the thinkin type, Orrin was more the get shit done,
and fuck you up type. Both boys were a little bit odd, or goofy in their
own way, and the other boys in town would frequently make fun of them
for being crippled, or weird or visionary, or some other thing that boys
make fun of each other for. This “us vs. them” mentality united Joe and
Orrin in a way that can't be shared by people that haven't experienced
their situation. Joe himself was known for scrapping with the
neighborhood boys occasionally, however, he was kind of a pipsqueak in
comparison to some other bigger farm boys, so he would frequently get
his ass kicked when a confrontation would turn into a fight. This is
really no different than any other boy during that time. Shit, this is
how a lot of boys are growing up today. Only recently has society
started seeing a turn against fighting and bullying in schools and
neighborhoods between boys. 

Well, where Joe was lacking in muscle, Orrin seemed to excel. He was
simply tougher than a lot of the neighborhood boys, especially Joe. This
gave the two of them a very interesting friendship that will become very
useful for Joe in the very near future in our timeline. It isn't until
1838 that Orrin really starts to embody the spirit of the Destroying
Angel of the church, but he had the personality for it, long before he
actually fell into this role. Orrin was a tough bastard. 

My absolute favorite part about Orrin was the fact that he had a high
voice. A man like this, you picture being rough tough and having a gruff
voice, however, his was higher pitched than normal, and under times of
distress, it became higher pitched. So he would be like “Hey are you
looking at my short leg” “Stop makin fun of me asshole\!\!\!\!”. If you
look at a picture of this guy, he looks like a biker yeti, somebody you
would picture having a scruffy intimidating voice, but no. It just
sounded ridiculous. The best part about his voice was his catch phrase.
Whenever something happened that he liked, or he just wanted to exclaim
something out of excitement he would yell “WHEAT\!” or should I say
“wheat\!(high pitched)”.

A lot of the locals called Joseph a vagrant and a drunkard, following in
the footsteps of his fantastic father figure BDC. Well, this was
something else that brought the two young men together. Orrin thoroughly
enjoyed his alcohol, tobacco, and foul mouth. Joe and Orrin were two
peas in a bullshit pod. Don't get me wrong, Hyrum and Joe were really
good friends, but they were also brothers, which is totally different
than the friend dynamic that Orrin and Joe had. Even Ollie Cowdung was
Joe's cousin, making their friendship slightly less dynamic than that of
Joe and Orrin. The way I picture Ollie and Joe's relationship was bit
more master/slave, or commander/actor. Ollie kinda just did whatever Joe
said. However, Orrin was much stronger than Ollie, both physically and
in will and personality. Joe couldn't control Orrin the way he could
Ollie, so he had to find ways to fuel Orrin's ego and point it in the
right direction, as oppose to break him with commands from god like Joe
did with Ollie.

These personality profiles aren't baseless. We have a couple of
situations to help illustrate, or bring to life the relationships these
guys had with each other. Let's take what happened during the
translation of the BoM with Ollie to understand his and Joe's
relationship a little better. Sometime during the supposed three month
period of translating the BoM, Ollie thought that he might be able to
translate some himself, and have Joe scribe for him. Well, Joe came up
with a revelation that told Ollie, that if he had faith in the lord and
his own abilities, he would have the gift of translation just like Joe.
Ollie attempted to come up with some of the BoM, which was never
printed, and is lost to historical mystery. Soon after this attempted,
Joe came up with another revelation from god that Ollie was to be Joe's
assistant, and scribe for Joe, and never do anything else. This may have
been because Ollie wasn't very good at translating, but I tend to go the
other way. I believe that the revelations/translations that Ollie gave
were too awesome, in Joe's opinion anyway. Not wanting to be shown up by
his lackey, Joe came up with revelation stating that Ollie didn't
possess the same powers as Joe, therefore, his revelations were
inferior, and would never be shared with the church. 

A similar situation happened with Hiram Page, which is something we've
talked about before, but without any real context of when the situation
fell into the timeline. Sometime just after the organization of the
church, during one of the early assemblies, Hiram Page tried his hand at
revelating through his own precious seer stone. We aren't really sure
why Hiram did this, but one prevailing theory was that the new
congregants weren't fully convinced of Joe's authority, or connection to
the divine. A few episodes ago, when we talked about this, I said it was
because Joe was dragging his feet when it came to telling the
congregants where the final gathering place of the rapture was, or where
this brand new church planned on putting the new Jerusalem that Joe kept
talking about. I tend to think that this is what the revelation that
Page gave was about, but we aren't really certain why Hiram did this,
primarily because we don't have the revelation available to us to
speculate on, or try to draw conclusions from. Usually when we see the
content of a revelation, it's pretty easy to surmise why it was given,
or speculate on the situation that necessitated the revelation in the
first place. Unfortunately, we can't do this with Page's revelation.
Regardless of why he tried giving revelation on behalf of the church,
once Joe found out, in typical 'take my ball and go home' fashion, he
ordered the revelation to be burned, and the stone that Hiram used,
crushed into dust, because the revelation was obviously from the devil.
I'm sure it had nothing to do with the fact that it was a blatant
subversion to Joe's supposedly divine authority. It was clearly just
because the revelation was actually evil.

Really, this was clearly just a manifestation of Joe stomping out the
competition in his own ranks. What's more than that, he ordered Ollie to
go tell Hiram that the revelation was not of god, and that Hiram was to
destroy it, and his stone. Joe also told both of them that stoned sight
was to be left up to him, and him alone. This was just another power
play by Joe. Now let's compare that to a revelation that Joe gave to
Orrin, and try to see the difference.

During one of Orrin's many bat-shit, crazy, gun-toting stunts, during
which he faced certain death, he somehow emerged on the other side
without so much as a scratch. In the aftermath, Joe gave Orrin a
revelation that if he never cut his hair, he would never be harmed by
blade or bullet.

Do you see the difference in revelation that I'm talking about? One was
used to quell and destroy the ego and free-spirit of two people, and the
other was meant to feed the parasitic ego of Orrin. I think Joe had a
kind of unspoken respect for Orrin. I think he understood that he
couldn't control Orrin the same way he could other people, he could
merely point Orrin in the desired direction, and hope that everything
turned out for the best for him. This brings us to our official Naked
Mormonism nick-name for Orrin Porter Rockwell. Old Pistol Packin Porter,
his friends knew him as Ol' Port.

Now you can see why Pistol Packin Porter is one of my favorite people in
the entire Mormon history. He was not only a loose cannon, but a
complete reckless badass, that enjoyed the carnality of life and
killing, more than he cared for a life of piety. One of his best traits
was the fact that he was completely illiterate for most of his life, and
died only semi-literate, meaning, he never read the BoM to know what he
was really following, he just took Joe's word for it, whenever he was
given instructions, and Ol' Port was proud of this bit of ignorance.
There just isn't another wild card quite like him in all of Mormon
history. Ol' Orrin Pistol-Packin-Porter Rockwell didn't give no fucks,
and didn't give a fuck who gave a fuck about it. He did his own thing,
all while under the banner of Joe's heaven, and was directed by Joe's
self-serving whims. Ol' Port was responsible for a lot more than what
we'll cover in this episode, but this is the official introduction of
this dynamic, controversial, and all around amazing character in our
timeline. 

Pistol-Packin-Port became the youngest person to be baptized and
confirmed into the church during it's first congregation being around 17
at the time. The reason I say 'around', is because there's a little
argument about whether he was born in 1813 or 1815. I figured if I say
around 17, it pretty much covers both bases, and gets closest to actual
fact, excusing a little ambiguity.

So BDC, Lucy Smith, Not-So-Smarty-Marty, and Pistol-Packin-Port were the
first four people to be baptized into the church during that tuesday
session on April 6<sup>th</sup>, 1830. These baptisms, along with
calling some of the brethren that were already members to leadership
positions, pretty much covers everything that happened during that
session, so lets move onto the first actual Sunday assembly of the
church on April 11<sup>th</sup>, 1830.

But, before moving on to that, it might be a good idea to talk about the
evolution of Joe's revelations throughout his leadership in the church.
When he was just starting out, the revelations seem to be for purely
utility purposes. A need arises in the church, Joe comes up with a very
basic, bare-bones revelation to fix the problem, and everybody follows
orders and moves on. This is the stage we're at right now with the
revelations. During this early period, Joe was still using Precious, and
Mr. Hat to ensure accuracy of his revelations from the almighty god of
the universe, whereas very soon, he leaves the props behind, and just
slips into an almost trance-like state to do his revelating. Then he
gets to a point where he just comes up with revelation to best suit his
needs. He starts to condemn people more during the revelations, and
calls himself the lord thy god more frequently, and adds a significant
amount more fluff. By the time the saints get to Missouri, every
revelation spends one or two verses dealing with the problem that it's
meant to fix, and everything else in the section is just a sermon
calling people to repentance, or telling people to trust him, cuz he
totally is speaking for god and nobody can challenge it. As we advance
in the storyline, it'll be easier to see these differences in Joe's
revelations. It's really quite fascinating, and I'll try to point out
the differences as much as possible. Let me give an example of a
bare-bones revelation like I've been talking about. It was either issued
at the April 6<sup>th</sup> congregation, or it might have been given
during the first Sunday assembly on the 11<sup>th</sup>, it's not really
clear, and it doesn't really matter too much. What we're concerned with
is the content of the revelation.

Once again, I'm taking this from history of the church vol.1 page 80.
It's worth briefly pointing out that I'll be spending most of this
episode in this book. It's what the church tells us about itself, and
it's extremely revealing, and as far as historians can tell, this
version aligns with reality quite closely. Keeping all the historical
facts in mind, where we get to play around on this show, is reading in
between the lines, or trying to speculate on the real world need for a
given revelation.

For example, this revelation I'm about to read is given to multiple new
members of the church, and was obviously born out of necessity. The
people in this revelation were obviously asking Joe what God wanted them
to do, in order to further the kingdom of god, aka Joe's church.

“Behold, I speak unto you, Oliver a few words. Behold thou art blessed,
and art under no condemnation. But beware of pride, lest thou shouldst
enter into temptation.

Make known thy calling unto the church, and also before the world, and
thy heart shall be opened to preach the truth from henceforth and
forever. Amen

Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no
condemnation, and thy heart is opened, and thy tongue loosed; and thy
calling is to exhortation, and to strengthen the church continually.
Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy
family. Amen.

Behold, I speak a few words unto you, Samuel; for thou also art under no
condemnation, and thy calling is to exhortation, and to strengthen the
church; and thou art not as yet called to preach before the world. Amen

Behold, I speak a few words unto you, Joseph (BDC); for thou also art
under no condemnation, and thy calling also is to exhortation, and to
strenghten the church; and this is thy duty from henceforth and forever.
Amen

Behold, I manifest unto you, Joseph Knight, by these words, that you
must take up your cross, in the which you must pray vocally before the
world as well as in secret, and in your family, and among your friends,
and in all places.

And, behold, it is your duty to unite with the true church, and give
your language to exhortation continually, that you may receive the
reward of the laborer. Amen.”

You see what I mean? At this stage, Joe was still trying on all kinds of
different ideas to see what worked, and what could be best utilized to
control the people around him that were members of the church. He was
just at the beginning of his crazy theological evolution when the church
was first organized. In the grand scheme of things, Joe had barely
gotten started. The church hadn't moved to Ohio yet, where it would more
than double in size. The history of the church wasn't being officially
recorded by anybody yet. Joe's revelations hadn't been compiled into the
Book of Commandments yet. Joe hadn't even started on his translation of
the bible with Sidney Rigdon yet. In fact, by the church's recorded
history, Joe hadn't even met Hingepin Rigdon yet. The Pratt brothers
weren't around quite yet. Brigham Young was still completely ignorant to
the entire Mormon movement. Missionary forces had yet to be formally
organized. There had been a few people here and there sent out with
incomplete copies of the BoM, however, the first full-on missionary
force of the church was still waiting to be organized under Joe's
direction. As a matter of fact, the revelation we just read was the
formal calling of Hyrum, Samuel, and BDC Smith, along with Joseph Knight
Sr. to be the first missionaries for the church. Everything's in it's
very early stages. Joe was taking baby steps, day by day, to organize
the church. It wasn't all revealed at once in it's current form, as is
usually understood by believing Mormons today. You would think that if
the church were indeed restored from the one true church that Jesus
created, it would be restored through the perfect and almighty god of
the universe, and would therefore be brought to fruition all at once
through perfect means, and never need to be changed from what was
originally uttered by Joe. I suppose we'll have to see if there are any
differences from the original church to today's church, and it would
seem like it might falsify the claim of divine origin, based on that
premise alone. I suppose we'll just find out, won't we.

Anyway, let's move on to the rest of what happened during that first
Sunday meeting in Fayette. 

Once again, we return to the history of the church vol.1 page 80.

“On Sunday, April 11th, 1830, Oliver Cowdery preached the first public
discourse that was delivered by any of our number. Our meeting was held,
by previous appointment, at the house of Mr. Peter Whitmer, Sen.,
Fayette. Large numbers of people attended, and the same day the
following were baptized, viz., Hiram Page, Katharine Page, Christian
Whitmer, Anne Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Elizabeth Whitmer; and on the 18th
day, Peter Whitmer, Sen., Mary Whitmer, William Jolly, Elizabeth Jolly,
Vincent Jolly, Richard B. Peterson, and Elizabeth Anne Whitmer—all by
Oliver Cowdery, in Seneca Lake.”

First off, why did Ollie Cowdung deliver the first actual public
discourse on the church? It seems odd. Why wouldn't Joe, the prophet of
god and mouthpiece of divine revelation, be the person to deliver the
first sermon? I'm not sure if it's relevant at all, but doesn't it seem
odd? Nobody knew the BoM better than Joe, because it all came from his
mind, however, his right hand man was the person to give everybody the
first lesson about the BoM and early Mormonism. Oh well, like I said, I
don't think it matters too much. What does seem to matter was who
baptized all of the new people that wanted to join the church.... For
some reason, this responsibility also fell on Ollie's shoulders. Was Joe
so holy of a prophet, that he couldn't be bothered with being the person
to physically baptize these people that wanted to fall into line with
him?

I don't know if this is why, but I want to try and speculate on why Joe
conducted the church this way. I personally think that Joe was trying to
elevate himself above the temporal rituals and whatnot that were
necessary to run the church. It's like any boss at any job ever. The
boss may or may not know how to perform a simple task in the company,
but he/she never will, because that's a big degree of separation between
the boss, and the lowly worker underneath that boss. Well, I think the
same thing was going on with the Joe and Ollie dynamic here. Joe wanted
everybody to see him as being above what they had to do in order to
reach god. Joe wanted to portray himself as already being the closest
man to god that existed on the earth. How could he be above everybody
else in that respect, if he is required by god to perform everything
that the lowly peasants in his church have to do. Now, granted, that's
just my opinion, but doesn't it seem to make a little bit of sense? If I
were a cult leader, I wouldn't be one of the guys hoeing the weeds out
of the garden, I'd be the dude sitting in a red velvet chair, cigar and
expensive scotch in hand, overlooking the masses as they do my bidding.
That's just how cult leading works. Like I said, just speculation.

Another piece of speculation to offer here is the possible explanation
for why some historians think that the first congregation happened in
Palmyra, as opposed to Fayette. It has primarily to do with the people
that were baptized during the meeting on the 6<sup>th</sup>, as opposed
to who joined on the 11<sup>th</sup>. All of the people that Joined
during the 6<sup>th</sup>, were residing in the Palmyra/Manchester area
during the time, and it's not necessarily easy to believe that all of
them would travel to Fayette on a tuesday, just to be part of the first
congregation. Additionally, why wouldn't all those Whitmers that were
baptized on the 11<sup>th</sup>, just get baptized during the first
congregation if it was in their own home, as opposed to waiting 5 more
days just to be baptized on the first Sunday Assembly? It just doesn't
make sense. But, if you posit the claim that the first congregation was
held in Palmyra, and the first Sunday assembly was held 30 miles away in
Fayette 5 days after the first congregation, the names of the people
make more sense. Martin Harris, BDC, Lucy Smith, and Ol'
Pistol-Packin-Porter were all in Palmyra, and were baptized on the
6<sup>th</sup>. However, Hiram Page, Katharine Page, Christian Whitmer,
Anne Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Elizabeth Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Sen.,
Mary Whitmer, William Jolly, Elizabeth Jolly, Vincent Jolly, Richard B.
Peterson, and Elizabeth Anne Whitmer were all in Fayette and were
baptized on the 11<sup>th</sup>, or 18<sup>th</sup>. Like I said
earlier, it's a very small, and irrelevant detail, but I figured it
might be useful to hash out the controversy, and consider what fits the
evidence best, and once again, the recorded Mormon version, for whatever
reason, conflicts with very simple logic.

Moving on, let's find out what happens next. The first congregation of
the church had been convened, and was over with. The first Sunday
assembly of the church, and the first official sermon had been given,
and lots of people had been baptized. Now we can move on to the actual
missionary efforts in the early church. The church had some very
polarizing doctrine. People would accept or reject it wholly, there
weren't a lot of people in the middle. The church and it's doctrine
radically divided families, and friends. Within the first 9 months of
the church, the first group of 6 people were ex-communicated from the
church. The only way the church would be able to survive was aggressive
expansion through proselyting. They could only keep going if they were
constantly gaining new members, and consuming new ground. If the
missionary force slowed, new members stopped coming in, and the bleeding
of members overtook the number of new-comers.

As could be expected, Joe decided to do a bit of the missionary work
himself. However, he didn't go tracting strangers doorsteps like he told
the other early missionaries to do, he went to secure high value
targets. One of these was the family of Joseph Knight Sr. Going back to
the history of the church vol. 1.

“During this month of April, I went on a visit to the residence of Mr.
Joseph Knight, of Colesville, Broome county, New York, with whom and his
family I had been for some time acquainted, and whose name I had
previously mentioned as having been so kind and thoughtful towards us
while translating the Book of Mormon. Mr. Knight and his family were
Universalists, but were willing to reason with me upon my religious
views, and were, as usual, friendly and hospitable. We held several
meetings in the neighborhood; we had many friends, and some enemies. Our
meetings were well attended, and many began to pray fervently to
Almighty God, that He would give them wisdom to understand the truth.” 

The kindness, and thoughtfulness that Joe mentioned there was the time
during late May to early June, Joseph Knight Sr. brought some food and
other provisions to the starving newlywed Joseph and Emma that were
translating the book with Ollie in Harmony, Pennsylvania. This was at a
time that they desperately need any help they could get because Issac
Hale had cut off any assistance he was giving to them, and Joe and Ollie
were busy all day playing with their book. There was no income to the
household, and they couldn't bum meals off the Hale family anymore. So,
Joseph Knight Sr. showed up just in the nick of time to keep their
current lifestyle alive. Of course, barely a week after this nice
gesture, they all moved to the Whitmer home, and there received free
room and board for the remaining duration of authoring the BoM. 

After Joe talks about Joseph Knight's hospitality, he tells us that he
started a congregation of the church in Colesville. The Knights ended up
converting to the church. Fortunately for us, it's not just as simple as
Joe reasoning them into the church before they converted. For the Knight
family conversion story, we need to dive back into the history of the
church. This reading will be a little longer, but hang in there with me
because it tells us some crazy shit, and I think it helps to illustrate
why the Knights converted from Universalism, to Joe's Church of Christ.
There really isn't a whole lot of difference between the 1830's version
of Universalism, and what Joe was preaching. Joe just created a
structured version of what most Universalists believed at that time.

But let's get to the important, and more realistic version of why the
Knights converted. This is starting on page 82 of Vol. 1 of the History
of the Church.

“Our meetings were well attended, and many began to pray fervently to
Almighty God, that He would give them wisdom to understand the truth.

Amongst those who attended our meetings regularly, was Newel Knight, son
of Joseph Knight. He and I had many serious conversations on the
important subject of man's eternal salvation. We had got into the habit
of praying much at our meetings, and Newel had said that he would try
and take up his cross, and pray vocally during meeting; but when we
again met together, he rather excused himself. I tried to prevail upon
him, making use of the figure, supposing that he should get into a
mud-hole, would he not try to help himself out? And I further said that
we were willing now to help him out of the mud-hole. He replied, that
provided he had got into a mud-hole through carelessness, he would
rather wait and get out himself, than to have others help him; and so he
would wait until he could get into the woods by himself, and there he
would pray. Accordingly, he deferred praying until next morning, when he
retired into the woods; where, according to his own account afterwards,
he made several attempts to pray, but could scarcely do so, feeling that
he had not done his duty, in refusing to pray in the presence of others.
He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and
body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to
alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and bring me to him. I
went and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted
upon in a very strange manner; his visage and limbs distorted and
twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally
he was caught up off the floor of the apartment, and tossed about most
fearfully.”

Okay.... So this is the first time we've talked about demon possession
on this show, but here it is, right in the church's own published
history. Newel Knight was apparently possessed by demons, because he
didn't want to pray in public or something.... So he comes home one day
looking like shit, and his wife goes and gets Joe, to have him cast out
these demons, or maybe just see what he can do about the situation.
Well, Joe shows up, and Newel is in bad shape. According to Joe,
literally in bad shape, like his limbs were distorted and twisted all
fucky and whatnot. Then, somehow, Newel levitated off the floor of the
apartment and was tossed around like a fucking demon puppet rag-doll.
I've heard this story related before that Newel was just bouncing around
in the rafters of the building like a ping-pong demon toy. I personally
believe that this is an over-dramatization of the story. I think he was
just laying on the floor, then a blood vessel in his head burst from the
high fever he was fighting, taking out a small portion of his mind along
with it, and sent him into a delusional rage, or possibly a mild seizure
of some sort, and he just threw himself around the room, running into
walls and falling over furniture. It's kind of hard to tell exactly what
Joe means in this account, but I think it makes a little more sense than
the whole Demon rag-doll being thrown around the rafters of the house.

So let's hear about Joe's handling of the situation.

“The First Miracle in the Church.

His situation was soon made known to his neighbors and relatives and in
a short time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to
witness the scene. After he had thus suffered for a time, I succeeded in
getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me,
and with great earnestness requested me to cast the devil out of him,
saying that he knew he was in him, and that he also knew that I could
cast him out.

I replied, "If you know that I can, it shall be done," and then almost
unconsciously I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of
Jesus Christ to depart from him; when immediately Newel spoke out and
said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight. This was
the first miracle which was done in the Church, or by any member of it;
and it was done, not by man, nor by the power of man, but it was done by
God, and by the power of godliness; therefore, let the honor and the
praise, the dominion and the glory, be ascribed to the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.”

There we have it, the first self proclaimed miracle the church had was
performed by Joseph Smith himself, and it was a demon exorcism. I find
it strange that the rate of demon possession has been decreasing at an
inverse rate to the number of people that have “possession” like
symptoms, that are suffering from a mental disorder, or viral infection,
which we are learning how to better treat every day. At this rate, in
less than a century, nobody will believe that demons are real, and we'll
actually be able to cure whatever mental illness causes a person to
seize on the floor, or throw themselves against the walls in a room.
What I'm trying to say is, this is a pretty fucking lame first miracle.
Joe couldn't give the young man Pistol-Packing-Port the two inches back
in his leg, thus eliminating his life-long limp? Joe couldn't bring his
dead child back to life? Joe couldn't miracle $3,000 out of thin air so
Marty wouldn't have to sell his farm to finance the BoM? I suppose that
back in this day, an exorcism was the closest thing they could get to
empirically verifiable divinity claims. I mean, even today people
believe in this shit. There are pastors that will give you a
skype-orcism for your demons, for just a small fee. It's pathetic that
this can be used as a confirmation bias of one's faith, that's the point
I'm driving at. And it fuckin worked for the Knight family too.

“Remarkable Experience of Newel Knight.

This scene was now entirely changed, for as soon as the devil had
departed from our friend, his countenance became natural, his
distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the Spirit of the
Lord descended upon him, and the visions of eternity were opened to his
view. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily weakness was such
that we were obliged to lay him upon his bed, and wait upon him for some
time. He afterwards related his experience as follows:

I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting on me, and
immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself
attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation,
insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by, I
felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head,
which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that
the Spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that
my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams.

All this was witnessed by many, to their great astonishment and
satisfaction, when they saw the devil thus cast out, and the power of
God, and His Holy Spirit thus made manifest. As may be expected, such a
scene as this contributed much to make believers of those who witnessed
it, and finally the greater part of them became members of the Church.”

So apparently, there were some witnesses to this experience, and it made
believers out of them. Well, that's the history according to Joseph, and
the history of the church. Let's look at the surrounding evidence of
what was happening at the same time, and directly after this incident,
to try and parse the truth out of the situation.

After this exorcism, the Knight family joined up, and became
participating members of the Colesville branch of the church. According
to the church's account, this happened around the end of May 1830, but
some shit goes down in June. On June 9<sup>th</sup> the early Mormonites
had the first organized conference in Fayette with a self reported
membership of about 30 people. After this, Joe decides to go check on
the congregation in Colesville, roughly 100 miles away. The entire time
that Joe was preaching here, there was a lot of opposition to him.
Honestly, I can't put my finger on exactly why they hated Joe so much.
You can try and chalk it up to the fact that Joe was preaching his new
Jesus, and pulling members away from their existing congregations. That
would have motivated the local pastors to vilify Joe and turn everybody
against him. However, that being considered, I don't think it fully
explains what happens in June. Joe was arrested and brought to trial
twice, in two different counties for being a “disorderly person”. From
what I can tell, it looks like the first arrest happened in Colesville
by a Joseph Chamberlin. The mobs had gathered, and they wanted to either
beat the shit out of Joe, or straight up kill him. Apparently, while
Chamberlin was walking Joe to the wagon they would be riding to South
Bainbridge, the mob surrounded them the entire time, and even crowded
around the wagon. According to Joe's history, the mob was waiting for
some signal from the constable, so they could take Joe and have their
way with him. The signal was never given, and the men took off in the
wagon. After going a few blocks, a wheel fell off the wagon, and the mob
encircled the wagon again, in hopes of taking Joe off Chamberlin's
hands. They repaired the wheel, and made their way to South Bainbridge,
where they would stay the night in a tavern. Even though they had
traveled the some 15 miles from Colesville to South Bainbridge, Joe was
still afraid of the mob coming in the night to drag him out in the
street to tar and feather him, or just kick the shit out of him. The
constable solved this problem by sleeping with his feet up against the
door, and a loaded musket in his hands. No attempt was made on Joe's
safety that night. 

The next day, the trial commenced “amidst a multitude of spectators”.
Once again, Joseph Knight Sr. comes to Joe's rescue. He was friends with
two lawyers, James Davidson, and John Reid. Joseph Knight paid them to
defend Joe, and they did quite well. I'm just going to read the supposed
court proceedings from the history of the church Vol. 1 starting on page
89. There's some very interesting information couched in between the
lines here, and I look forward to speculating in my usual way when we
get to them. 

“At length the trial commenced amidst a multitude of spectators, who in
general evinced a belief that I was guilty of all that had been reported
concerning me, and of course were very zealous that I should be punished
according to my crimes. Among many witnesses called up against me, was
Mr. Josiah Stoal—of whom I have made mention as having worked for him
some time—and examined to the following effect:

"Did not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, have a horse of you?"

"Yes."

"Did not he go to you and tell you that an angel had appeared unto him
and authorized him to get the horse from you?"

"No, he told me no such story."

"Well, how had he the horse of you?"

"He bought him of me as any other man would."

"Have you had your pay?"

"That is not your business."

The question being again put, the witness replied:

"I hold his note for the price of the horse, which I consider as good as
the pay; for I am well acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jun., and know him
to be an honest man; and if he wishes, I am ready to let him have
another horse on the same terms."

Pretty interesting stuff here. Bossman Josiah Stowell, who gave a very
internally contradictory testimony on behalf of Joe during the 1826
trial, was called onto the stand once again to testify on behalf of Joe.
Apparently there was some sort of dispute about whether or not Joe was
going to pay Bossman Joe for the horse he supposedly signed a note for.
I think this just lays bare how convincing and smooth of a talker Joe
really was. He had no money whatsoever, and had swindled Bossman Joe out
of quite a bit of money in their treasure seeking adventures. Then
Bossman Joe thought it was a good idea to sell a horse to Joe, not for
cash, but for a note of promised payment, which Joe had yet to make good
on. And yet, Bossman Joe was still willing to sell Joe another horse on
the same terms because he believed in the young prophet so much. There's
something deeply wrong with that in my opinion. Let's move on to the
next, and somewhat similar testimony.

“Mr. Jonathan Thompson was next called up and examined:

"Has not the prisoner, Joseph Smith Jun., had a yoke of oxen of you?"

"Yes."

"Did he not obtain them of you by telling you that he had a revelation
to the effect that he was to have them?"

"No, he did not mention a word of the kind concerning the oxen; he
purchased them the same as any other man would."

So Jonathan Thompson was called to testify on Joe's behalf, and did so.
Much like the last testimony, for some reason the questioning lawyer
thought that Joe had just given these guys revelation, stating that they
should give the livestock to Joe. However, once they were asked directly
about this, they blatantly denied it, and said that they expected to
receive payment from Joe for the livestock just like any other sale
between any other honest men. I wonder if they ever did get their money
back out of Joe... I don't think we'll ever know one way or another on
that point. Let's move on to the part of the trial that I find most
hilarious and exciting.

“After a few more such attempts, the court was detained for a time, in
order that two young women, daughters of Mr. Stoal, with whom I had at
times kept company, might be sent for, in order, if possible, to elicit
something from them which might be made a pretext against me. The young
ladies arrived, and were severally examined touching my character and
conduct in general, but particularly as to my behavior towards them,
both in public and private; when they both bore such testimony in my
favor as left my enemies without a pretext on their account. Several
other attempts were made to prove something against me, and even
circumstances which were alleged to have taken place in Broome county,
were brought forward, but these my lawyers would not admit of as
testimony against me; in consequence of which my persecutors managed to
detain the court until they had succeeded in obtaining a warrant from
Broome county, which warrant they served upon me at the very moment that
I was acquitted by this court.”

Apparently, after the court couldn't find anything to convict Joe with
during all of the testimonies, only two of which are included in the
official church history, Bossman Joe's two lovely daughters were called
up to the stand. Apparently, everybody in town thought there might have
been a little hanky panky amongst these hormone crazed young adults. I
don't tend to see a problem with this, however they were probably
calling it up in reference to adultery charges. I think everybody
thought there might have been something going on there while Joe was
married to the lovely Emma, which would justify the court charging him
with adultery, or at least being a disorderly person on these grounds
alone. Now, whether or not anything happened between Joe and these two
girls, is irrelevant. The court couldn't find enough evidence in the
girls testimonies in order to convict Joe. Regardless of conviction and
evidence, I think it's worth talking about the possibilities here. We
know that Joe liked his women, so much so that conservative guesses put
him as having 34 wives at the time of his death. Do we honestly think
that Joe wasn't a pussy-hound at 24, but only later became one when he
married his first polygamist wife, Fanny Alger, sometime around 1836? I
can tell you from the perspective of a man that's currently in the age
range when the somewhat newlywed Joe might have been fooling around with
the Stowell girls that it simply doesn't happen that way. The drive is
always there, and it doesn't increase the older I get. I'm willing to
put my chips on the more controversial side of the claims here. If Joe
didn't actually mess around with these girls, I'm willing to bet that he
was at very least flirtatious with them, and they probably were a little
flirty back. I don't know if I would go as far as claiming that these
girls may have been Joe's first threesome, because what guy doesn't
dream of having a threesome when he's 24? I'm willing to bet that goes
for straight and gay guys alike. There really isn't any way of
determining that Joe did indeed go that far while being a married man,
but it sure is fun to fantasize about as an ex-Mormon that used to hold
so much reverence for this man and his manufactured piety. 

Moving right along, unfortunately we don't have the actual original
transcript from this trial. What we do have is an abridged copy that was
published in a newspaper less than a year after the actual occurrence.
Let's cover this account. It includes a bunch of stuff that isn't in the
History of the Church version, and pretty much includes none of what the
history of the church version has. The only way we know that these
accounts are even of the same trial is because the dates, charges, and
some of the names match up. I'm inclined to believe that both of them
are fairly accurate accounts, just incomplete in different places for
different reasons. 

This is pulled from user.xmission.com, and I'll include the link to the
webpage in the show notes.

“Abram Willard Benton of South Bainbridge, New York, wrote:  

This trial led to an investigation of his \[Joseph Smith Jr.'s\]
character and conduct, which clearly evinced to the unprejudiced, whence
the spirit came which dictated his inspirations. During the trial it was
shown that the Book of Mormon was brought to light by the same magic
power by which he pretended to tell fortunes, discover hidden treasures,
\&c. Oliver Cowdrey, one of the three witnesses to the book, testified
under oath, that said Smith found with the plates, from which he
translated his book, two transparent stones, resembling glass, set in
silver bows. That by looking through these, he was able to read in
English, the reformed Egyptian characters, which were engraved on the
plates.  
![](http://user.xmission.com/~research/early/blank.gif)So much for the
gift and power of God, by which Smith says he translated his book. Two
transparent stones, undoubtedly of the same properties, and the gift of
the same spirit as the one in which he looked to find his neighbor's
goods. It is reported, and probably true, that he commenced his juggling
by stealing and hiding property belonging to his neighbors, and when
inquiry was made, he would look in his stone, (his gift and power) and
tell where it was. Josiah Stowell, a Mormonite, being sworn, testified
that he positively knew that said Smith never had lied to, or deceived
him, and did not believe he ever tried to deceive anybody else. The
following questions were then asked him, to which he made the replies
annexed.  
![](http://user.xmission.com/~research/early/blank.gif)Did Smith ever
tell you there was money hid in a certain place which he mentioned? Yes.
Did he tell you, you could find it by digging? Yes. Did you dig? Yes.
Did you find any money? No. Did he not lie to you then, and deceive you?
No\! the money was there, but we did not get quite to it\! How do you
know it was there? Smith said it was\! Addison Austin was next called
upon, who testified, that at the very same time that Stowell was digging
for money, he, Austin, was in company with said Smith alone, and asked
him to tell him honestly whether he could see this money or not. Smith
hesitated some time, but finally replied, "to be candid, between you and
me, I cannot, any more than you or any body else; but any way to get a
living." Here, then, we have his own confession, that he was a vile,
dishonest impostor. As regards the testimony of Josiah Stowell, it needs
no comment. He swore positively that Smith did not lie to him. So much
for a Mormon witness. Paramount to this, in truth and consistency, was
the testimony of Joseph Knight, another Mormonite. Newel Knight, son of
the former, and also a Mormonite, testified, under oath, that he
positively had a devil cast out of himself by the instrumentality of
Joseph Smith, jr., and that he saw the devil after it was out, but could
not tell how it looked\!

\[Abram W. Benton\], "Mormonites," *_Evangelical Magazine and Gospel
Advocate_* (Utica, New York) (April 9, 1831): 120”

There was plenty of interesting information in there that was completely
omitted from the officially recounted version by Joseph. I wonder why
Joe would only include stuff that made him look like an honest guy.
What's more, I wonder why this local magazine would include testimonies
that were explicitly damning to the character of Joseph Smith, and just
write off the positive testimonies as almost uselessly biased because
they come from Mormons. Well, that's what we do on this show. Bring both
sides to the table and see what makes the most sense. Hopefully there's
some little nugget of truth hidden in these two different accounts. But
before trying to summarize it all together and see what can be distilled
from the information, we need to include the other trial. Almost forgot
about it didn't ya?

Joe hadn't even left South Bainbridge yet, and he was arrested by
constable Ebenezer Hatch for an arrest warrant issued by Joel K. Noble,
for a complaint filed by Samuel Dickenson against Joe, once again for
being a disorderly person. Let's read the Church history version of this
trial and compare it with the much more complete secondary account of it
that was copied directly from the docket book of Joel K. Noble.

We have a bit of reading ahead of us, but, like usual, the more we read,
the more we begin to see into the personality of the person writing, or
in Joe's case dictating the writing to be written by Ollie or John
Whitmer. I'm all about jumping in and out of the mind of Joe whenever we
can, and I think this reading is extremely telling about Joe's
perspective of the situation.

“The Prophet's Second Arrest.

The constable who served this second warrant upon me had no sooner
arrested me than he began to abuse and insult me; and so unfeeling was
he with me, that although I had been kept all the day in court without
anything to eat since the morning, yet he hurried me off to Broome
county, a distance of about fifteen miles, before he allowed me any kind
of food whatever. He took me to a tavern, and gathered in a number of
men, who used every means to abuse, ridicule and insult me. They spit up
on me, pointed their fingers at me, saying, "Prophesy, prophesy\!" and
thus did they imitate those who crucified the Savior of mankind, not
knowing what they did.

Unnecessary Severity.

We were at this time not far distant from my own house. I wished to be
allowed the privilege of spending the night with my wife at home,
offering any wished for security for my appearance; but this was denied
me. I applied for something to eat. The constable ordered me some crusts
of bread and water, which was the only food I that night received. At
length we retired to bed. The constable made me lie next the wall. He
then laid himself down by me and put his arm around me, and upon my
moving in the least, would clench me fast, fearing that I intended to
escape from him; and in this very disagreeable manner did we pass the
night.

The Second Trial.

Next day I was brought before the magistrate's court at Colesville,
Broome county, and put upon my trial. My former faithful friends and
lawyers were again at my side; my former persecutors were arrayed
against me. Many witnesses were again called forward and examined, some
of whom swore to the most palpable falsehoods, and like the false
witnesses which had appeared against me the day previous, they
contradicted themselves so plainly that the court would not admit their
testimony. Others were called, who showed by their zeal that they were
willing enough to prove something against me, but all they could do was
to tell something which somebody else had told them.

Newel Knight vs. Lawyer Seymour.

In this frivolous and vexatious manner did they proceed for a
considerable time, when, finally, Newel Knight was called up and
examined by Lawyer Seymour, who had been especially sent for on this
occasion. One Lawyer Burch, also, was on the side of the prosecution;
but Mr. Seymour seemed to be a more zealous Presbyterian, and appeared
very anxious and determined that the people should not be deluded by any
one professing the power of godliness, and not "denying the power
thereof."

Mr. Knight was sworn, and Mr. Seymour interrogated him as follows:

"Did the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., cast the devil out of you?"

"No, sir."

"Why, have not you had the devil cast out of you?"

"Yes, sir."

"And had not Joe Smith some hand in its being done?"

"Yes, sir."

"And did not he cast him out of you?"

"No, sir; it was done by the power of God, and Joseph Smith was the
instrument in the hands of God, on the occasion. He commanded him to
come out of me in the name of Jesus Christ."

"And are you sure that it was the devil?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you see him after he was cast out of you?"

"Yes sir\! I saw him."

"Pray, what did he look like?"

\[Here one of my lawyers informed the witness that he need not answer
the question.\] The witness replied:

"I believe I need not answer your last question, but I will do it,
provided I be allowed to ask you one question first, and you answer me,
viz., Do you, Mr. Seymour, understand the things of the spirit?

"No," answered Mr. Seymour, "I do not pretend to such big things."

"Well, then," replied Knight, "it would be of no use to tell you what
the devil looked like, for it was a spiritual sight, and spiritually
discerned; and of course you would not understand it were I to tell you
of it.

The lawyer dropped his head, whilst the loud laugh of the audience
proclaimed his discomfiture.

Plea for the State.

Mr. Seymour now addressed the court, and in a long and violent harangue
endeavored to blacken my character and bring me in guilt of the charges
which had been brought against me. Among other things, he brought up the
story of my having been a money-digger; and in this manner proceeded,
hoping evidently to influence the court and the people against me.

Plea for the Defendant.

Mr. Davidson and Mr. Reid followed on my be behalf. They held forth in
true colors the nature of the prosecution, the malignancy of intention,
and the apparent disposition to persecute their client, rather than to
afford him justice. They took up the different arguments which had been
brought by the lawyers for the prosecution, and having shown their utter
futility and misapplication, then proceeded to scrutinize the evidence
which had been adduced, and each, in his turn, thanked God that he had
been engaged in so good a cause as that of defending a man whose
character stood so well the test of such a strict investigation. In
fact, these men, although not regular lawyers, were upon this occasion
able to put to silence their opponents, and convince the court that I
was innocent. They spoke like men inspired of God, whilst those who were
arrayed against me trembled under the sound of their voices, and quailed
before them like criminals before a bar of justice.”

Before summing this all up, let's hear what the justices account was
like from his docket. This is the second part on the same page of the
link I said I would include in the show notes. So if you're wanting to
see these non-mormon accounts of both trials, check the show notes for
the link. This reading is a little longer than the one we just read, but
I think it really sheds a lot of light on the situation, being a
legitimate court document and whatnot. A little bit of bias shines
through with a couple of the lines or questions, however, it's nowhere
near as biased as Joe's account of the situation, and it doesn't seem to
omit any important information from what I can tell. Needless to say,
this source is a fair amount more reliable that Joe's source. It's
recounted 2 years after the actual situation, which is kind of a bummer,
but it is a direct copy from the actual original document, meaning it's
extremely trustworthy as an accurate historical document. Besides, that
2 years is nothing compared to 8 years after the fact, which is what
we've been reading this whole time with every entry from the history of
the church.

Just so you're prepared, it starts off as the newspaper article, with a
heavy anti-Mormon slant from the reporter, but it gets to the actual
document we're interested in fairly soon.

“"Mormonism," *_New England Christian Herald, _*4 (November 7,
1832):22-23, Boston, Massachusetts, emphasis retained.

MORMONISM.

  
We have before noticed the bare-faced and outrageous delusion abroad in
the country, under the name of Mormonism; and though it is so shocking
to common sense, to reflect upon such a silly, and egregiously absurd,
though wicked system, yet the public mind ought to be informed of every
circumstance connected with the history of these deceivers and
disturbers of good order and decency. We understand that Smith is now in
this city, or has been within a few days; and a Christian community
ought to arise, and thrust him back to the den of his ignominy. A friend
has requested us to insert the following account of the trial of Joseph
Smith, Jr., for a breach of the peace, in "looking through a certain
stone to find hid treasures, \&c." The account was published in the
Boston Christian Herald, some few weeks since; and the editor
remarks:-  
"Our readers are probably acquainted with the origin of this sect and
their Bible; and that two of the Mormonite preachers have visited this
city, and made a number of proselytes. Joseph Smith, Jr. is the founder;
"a bare-faced imposter, his moral character of the darkest hue, his name
a derision, shunned by all decent society, and disowned by his pious
father-in-law." He has associated with himself, characters, though of
less intellect, yet equally base and profligate, and for some years have
been practising upon the credulity of the weak. Many have been
*_swindled _*out of their property by these false prophets-let others
take warning.  
We extract the following from a letter written by a gentleman in
Windsor, Broome Co., N. Y., acquainted with Smith, and entitled to
confidence, to his friend in this city, dated August 30, 1832.

"It is more difficult to obtain information of this kind than one would
think, other than hearsay. The fact that J. Smith, Jr., and others, dug
in various places for money, is easily proved; at the great bend or near
there, that there was a company digging part of two years could be
easily proved;-but that Smith said that there was money buried there by
some Spaniards could not be so easily proved, though it is generally
believed; and also that toward the last of the digging there, he sold
out shares in the treasure to as many as he could, and when he quit
digging, said that the money had sunk down to a great depth. I have seen
a hole eight or ten feet deep, on the creek back of Captain Waller's,
where it was said Smith said there was treasure. On Monument Hill near
to what is called "The Monument," there is a hole dug 25 or 30 feet
deep, where it is said Smith said that two veins of gold crossed each
other as large as a barrel. On Mr. Samuel Stowe(ll)'s flat, a hole was
dug one night and filled again, and Smith was said to be one of the
number. I might mention a hole on the back side of the hill over the
river against where I live, and other places, if it were necessary; but
I forbear.  
I called on several persons to gain what information I could. The most I
could get was hearsay.-Among others, I called on Mr. William Devenport,
who went out with the Mormons to Ohio-and has since returned. He says
that he bore his own expenses out, but was often importuned by their
leader to put his money into the common stock, and was told, that those
who did not would be struck dead the moment they arrived on the promised
land-like Ananias and Sapphira. He said that the only object of the
leaders was in this, to get the money into their own hands and keep it.
He mentioned a widow Peck of Bainbridge, who, he said, paid in $500 and
went with them; but could not get a cent on the way to procure something
for a sick child. Said that he lived between two and three miles from
where they settled in Ohio, and that Smith had a new commandment every
few days through the summer, a year ago, and that last summer he thought
there was not a fortnight in which he did not have a new commandment.
Smith pretended to go into the woods and converse with the Almighty. Mr.
Devenport said he had lately received a letter from William Youman's
widow, who went out with the Mormons, and had since left them and got
married, stating that a Mr. Rigdon, or a name that sounded like it,
their principal preacher under Smith, said lately that the Mormon
religion was not true, and in consequence had been silenced by Smith.
Enclosed I send you some testimony taken on trial in Colesville. Several
offered to testify to what N. Knight had said of Smith's casting a devil
out of him; some thought he had returned and would seem to allude to the
unclean spirit mentioned in the Gospels."  
“The following is the report of the trial forwarded by the writer above,
and referred to in the letter:  
STATE OF NEW YORK, } JOEL K. NOBLE,  
BROOME COUNTY, SS. } *_Justice._*  
The People, }  
vs. } Samuel Dickenson,  
Joseph Smith, jr. } *_Complainant._*  
The defendant was brought before me by virtue of a warrant on the 30th
day of June, A. D. 1830, on a charge "that he, the said Joseph Smith,
Jr., had been guilty of a breach of the peace, against the good people
of the state of New York, by looking through a certain stone to find hid
treasures, \&c., within the Statute of Limitation.  
To the charge, the defendant plead not guilty. At the instance of the
people, *_Joseph A. S. Austin _*was by me duly sworn, and says "that he
had been acquainted with Smith, the prisoner, for several years; that
prisoner pretended to look in a certain glass, or stone, and said he
could tell where stolen goods were, and could discover mines of gold and
silver under ground; made some pretence at telling fortunes, but he,
witness, never knew of prisoner's finding any thing by his pretended
art. Once witness asked prisoner to tell him if he, prisoner, could tell
any thing by looking in said glass, and wished a candid and true answer.
Prisoner told witness frankly, he could not see any thing, and in
answer, prisoner likewise observed to witness, *_any thing you know for
a living: _*says, two years before this present time, he saw prisoner
drink a certain quantity of *_distilled liquor, and was drunk, as he
does believe; for he could not stand up, but lay in the woods for some
hours._*  
*_Harris Stowel, _*being by me sworn, saith, "he has been acquainted
with the prisoner for a number of years past; that prisoner said he
could look in a certain stone or glass, and could tell where money and
hid treasures were, and could tell where gold and silver mines, and salt
springs were; and that Smith, the prisoner, the *_pretended prophet and
money digger, _*had followed digging for money, for salt, and for gold
and silver mines for a number of years; that others, by his instigation,
had followed digging; that at one time, witness hid a bag of grain in
his barn, told Smith he had lost a bag of grain, and wished prisoner to
find it; prisoner looked in his glass in vain, for he could not find it;
prisoner, after using all his art for a number of days, offered to give
witness' brother fifty cents (so his brother told witness,) to find
where the grain was, and tell him, prisoner, unbeknown to witness, so
that Smith, the prisoner, might have the credit of finding the grain."  
Cross questions-says, he has not known the prisoner to look in the glass
within the space of two years last past.  
*_Josiah Stowel, _*being by me sworn, saith, he has been acquainted with
Smith, the prisoner, for quite a number of years; that he did pretend to
tell, by looking in a stone, or glass, where money and goods and mines
were in a manner peculiar to himself; the prisoner had followed digging
for money; pretended to find mines, hid treasures, and lost goods, and
frequently others would be digging with him; says that about three years
since, prisoner was put under arrest by an officer at Bainbridge in
Chenango county, for breaking the peace, and that he escaped from the
officer and went to Palmyra; and that about two years since, witness was
at Palmyra, and saw prisoner; that prisoner told witness, that the
*_Lord had told prisoner that a golden Bible _*was in a certain hill;
that Smith, the prisoner, went in the night, and brought the Bible, (as
Smith said;) witness saw a corner of it; it resembled a stone of a
greenish caste; should judge it to have been about one foot square and
six inches thick; he would not let it be seen by any one; the Lord had
commanded him not; it was unknown to Smith, that witness saw a corner of
the Bible, so called by Smith; told the witness the leaves were of gold;
there were written characters on the leaves; prisoner was commanded to
translate the same by the Lord; and from the Bible got from the hill, as
aforesaid, the prisoner said he translated the book of Mormon; prisoner
put a certain stone into his hat, put his face into the crown, then drew
the brim of the hat around his head to prevent light-he could then see,
as prisoner said, and translate the same, the Bible, got from the hill
in Palmyra, at the same time under a lock and in a chest; and the
prisoner, when looking for money, salt springs, hid treasures, \&c.,
looked in the same manner; did not know that prisoner could find money
lost, \&c.; and that prisoner told witness after he was arrested in
Bainbridge, he would not look for money, \&c. any more; told witness he
could see into the earth forty or fifty feet," \&c.  
*_Newel Knights, _*sworn, saith, "prisoner could see in a stone as
stated by Stowel; that formerly he looked for money, \&c., but latterly
he had become holy, was a true preacher of the Gospel of Christ,
possessed the power of casting out devils; he knew it to be a fact, that
he, (Smith, the prisoner,) had cast a devil from him, (witness,) in
manner following, viz. witness was in mind impressed; he and Smith did
conclude and knew the devil was in witness; they joined hands, their
faith became united, the devil went out of witness; witness knew it to
be a fact, for he saw the devil *_as he departed; _*Smith did it by the
*_power _*of God," \&c.  
A true copy from minutes taken by me on the trial.  
JOEL K. NOBLE, *_J. Peace._*  
*_Dated, Colesville, _*Aug. 28, 1832.

*_Joseph Smith, jr. _*was discharged; he had not looked in the glass for
two years to find money; \&c.,-hence it was outlawed.”

There's just a couple of things to talk about in this. I seem to ask
this question in one form or another almost every episode. Why is the
Mormon version of Mormon history so different from other versions of
Mormon history? I seem to harp on this point, but there are
inconsistencies with what we read, to the point that some contradictions
in perspective can't be easily reconciled.

In the recorded Mormon history, Joe is always some kind of noble hero
that's so despised by everybody he comes in contact with. Well,
everybody that didn't join his church anyway. Such a polarizing
individual, you really wonder what it was about him that made people so
desperately love him, or so violently despise him. I mean, the church
that I know is a fair amount different than what Joe started up,
primarily because the prophets now days are such white bread in warm
milk compared to Joe. If I could meet a person like Joe today, it might
be tough to resist falling into one of the similar bi-polar categories.
He was exciting, charismatic, attention grabbing, smooth, and
intelligent. He knew the basic Jesus speak of taking up your cross, or
calling people to repentance, and that gave him a level of legitimacy
that few others could attain like he did. But this same personality
type, has it's downsides. He was very megalomaniacal, and ego-centric.
He thought of himself, and rarely considered other people's perspective
on his actions. He pretty much did whatever he wanted, and he had the
eloquence to make it all seem okay, or to make people that he was
fucking over, come to his defense in times of need. This was born out
with the testimonies that Joe gave from these two court appearances. 

The only perspectives that Joe included in his own history, were those
of confirmation of his divinity or piety in some way. Joe tried to
portray himself as so much more than a man who ran a church. That same
attitude is reflected throughout the church today, they still white-wash
the history to try and take the venom out of the more damning pieces of
history. Well, this does a huge disservice to believing members of the
church. The members should be trusted to learn the truth, and make a
decision themselves, based on the truth claims of both sides, and how
close they match reality. The church is treating it's members as somehow
incapable of judging the information for themselves, and making a
rational decision. That's one thing that bothers me so much about the
church, and why I decided to do this podcast. I didn't want to be
treated dumb anymore. I didn't want to feel like there was something
that the church had to hide from me, for fear of losing my attendance. 

Whenever things like these legal trials are brought up, believers love
to write it off by saying something along the lines of “Well, Joseph
Smith was a man, and he had temptations and problems just like the rest
of us”. I don't deny that, in fact, we don't talk about these
problematic historical things, just to bring Joe down to a human level,
we talk about them because they're relevant. I want as clear of a
picture of Joseph Smith as possible. If these trials were for something
unrelated to Joe's church and doctrine, like public drunkenness and
indecency, I would pay a lot less attention to them. I mean, who hasn't
woken up naked in an alley after a long night of drinking before. Nobody
is exempt from being a human and doing human stuff, but that's not what
these trials were about. The definition is fairly broad when the legal
term is “disorderly person”, but when we learn of the local's opinions
of Joe, and reflect it with the questions and testimonies given, it's
easy to understand the scope of the legal violation that Joe was being
sued for. Joe used his pet rock Precious in Mr. Hat to help people find
things they were looking for. He would even go as far as taking
something from somebody, hiding it, and telling them that he could find
it with his precious seer stone if they just gave him a few shillings
for his work. In Bossman Josiah Stowell's case, Joe buried a feather in
the ground, and told Bossman Joe that he saw treasure and a feather
buried using his stone. When they dug into the ground where Joe had
marked off, and usually performed some kind of ritual, they found the
planted feather, but no treasure. Joe clearly used this rock in hat
trick to swindle people out of a living wage for his teenage to young
adult years.

The damning implication attached to this practice, was how Joe
translated the Book of Mormon. I get so sick of people saying that him
being convicted of fraud for glass looking, or seer stoning, or being a
disorderly person, has nothing to do with him being a prophet of god. He
translated the fucking Book of Mormon the same way he swindled these
people. Does that mean nothing? Is there really no connection there?
Once you read the BoM with a skeptical eye, and fact check the little
freak of a holy book for one goddamn chapter, it's so easy to see that
it was brought about by a single person with a very limited
understanding of Biblical Christianity, and a child's comprehension of
how the world works around them. Joe was such a fraud that it hurts.
It's actually makes my brain hurt when people call this man a holy
prophet, when his prophesy method was the same failed method that he
used to look for BURIED MUTHAFUCKIN TREASURE\!\! It shouldn't be hard to
knock the structure of every true blue believing Mormon's belief, right
off it's foundation. If we can prove that the primary mover behind the
Mormon religion was everything that Joe was, our work is done. Unlike
normal Christianity that can sort of survive without the bible,
Mormonism cannot survive without Joe and the Book of Mormon. It's
disgustingly false, and we can prove that as a fact, more so than most
other world religions.

This past week has been quite a party on the Naked Mormonism facebook
page. I'm sure that some, if not, most listeners are aware of the recent
revelation by the church. They posted pictures of the supposed seer
stone that we've come to lovingly know as Precious. I recommend checking
out the facebook page to see the posts, but if you aren't much of a
facebooker, I'll find the original article from the Salt Lake Tribune
and link it in the show notes. Personally, I fucking love it. The rock
is beautiful, and it fits most descriptions by the Chase brothers, Peter
Ingersoll, and others. Small brown rock, egg shaped, smooth, but,
unfortunately, there isn't any way of knowing for certain that this is
actually precious. I remember watching a video of a talk by Grant Palmer
when I first started my research into Mormon history. He tells about
himself being a young man in the church, and having access to things
that most young men don't at that age. I believe it was just after his
mission that he went into the church archive room, this was sometime in
the 70's maybe, and there he saw multiple rocks that the church had.
Most of them were claimed as being Joe's during different times in his
life, but if I remember correctly, there were also stones from other
church leaders in the group. I watched the video a long time ago, so
I'll try to find it and include a link to it in the notes. But I do
remember hearing him say that, and my mind just fucking exploded. It was
like the church knows about these rocks, and doesn't show anybody except
for the most worthy historians, the ones they deem worthy anyway. Palmer
having that experience was a once in a lifetime kind of thing, and he
didn't think much of it when it happened. He just thought they were some
cool rocks that Joe had, he didn't realize that there was so much story
behind them, and they had been used for so much in the church's past.
I'm pretty envious of his experience to be honest, but it makes me so
curious about what else is locked in the catacombs of the Mormon history
department. 

If we look at this in the grand scheme of things, this was a very lame
and unexciting revelation by the church. We've known since the beginning
of the church that Joe used seer stones to “translate” the Book of
Mormon, or give many of his various revelations that are now contained
in the Doctrine and Covenants. It only took the church 171 years after
Joe's death to come clean on this terribly menial detail in their
history. What bothers me so much about it, is the articles surrounding
it. The church never explicitly comes by the connection between this
stone, and all of Joe's swindling shenanigans, honestly. They just took
pictures of the stone, and said this is the stone Joe used to search for
buried treasure during his youth, and they stop there. They never talk
about how the same technique was used for finding the gold plates, just
with different stones, nor do they explicitly draw the connection to the
actual translating of the BoM. The church tends to give one little inch
of their doctrine and history once they're pushed up against a wall on
it. I have yet to see a single historical revelation given by the church
that would drastically change historians perspective of the church in
some way. Releasing these pictures is directly in line with what the
church has always done. We know something exists in it's history. Then,
we inquire about it, and the church directly denies it. Once the facts
are too strong to deny, the church becomes silent on the topic. Then
people that know about this hypothetical thing we're talking about keep
pushing, and the church quietly releases a document that somehow
rationalizes and justifies that piece of history, and puts their own
spin on it. Like I said, releasing these photos this long after the fact
is directly in line with what the church has always done.

In the grand scheme of things, I couldn't really give half a fuck about
the church coming by this honestly. I mean, the rock is cool looking,
and it's nice to be able to put a mental picture to the name Precious,
but really, this doesn't mean shit. We've known forever that Joe was
using a rock like this for all his fun and games, the church was just
nice enough to catch up with the times and come by it semi-honestly.
What I want to know is what the fuck does the church have that we don't
know about, that has some real impact on their history? Why won't they
let any historians traipse around in their basement for their dirty
laundry? If the church is indeed true, than whatever is in it's history
should serve to bolster the faith of it's members, and bring questioning
people into the fold with complete rational resolve. But, for some
reason, they still refuse to do so. If nothing else, the suppression of
knowledge should be reason enough to abandon this multi-billion dollar
conglomeration. But I suppose that's just my opinion. 

Bonus:

Preston T. Wilkins, known by me to be the same person, and being by me
duly sworn, saith, that Newel Knights did style himself a *_prophet of
the Lord, _*and was ordained by Joseph Smith, Jr., the pretended author
of the book of Mormon, as the said Newel told him, this deponent, and
this deponent understood so by others, that the said Newel was so
ordained; that the said Newel told this deponent he knew past, present
and future; that in order to ascertain the prophetic ability of the said
Newel, the deponent went and took from the father of said Newel, a
Mormon Bible, (so called) unbeknown to any one, as this deponent
believes, and buried it under his own door-step (witnesses); in the
morning the book was found; this deponent went to the aforesaid Newel,
told him the mystery that had happened; the said Newel and father told
this deponent it did not come from this package of books; they counted
them and were certain, as they said; the aforesaid Newel told this
deponent that God told him, the said Newel, that he had sent his angel
to put the book on the door-step, to convince him, this deponent, of the
truth of the Mormon book, as also to warn him to flee from the impending
wrath.  
PRESTON T. WILKINS.  
Subscribed and sworn before me, this 28th day of August, 1832.  
JOEL K. NOBLE, *_J. P._*  
A true copy from the original affidavit on file in my office. J. K.
NOBLE.  
*_Colesville, _*Aug. 28, 1832.
