---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 17 - Book of Mormon Versus Reality
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-17-book-mormon-versus-reality/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/episode-17-book-of-mormon-versus-reality
libsyn_embed: 3569864
redirect_from: /2015/05/22/ep-17-book-of-mormon-versus-reality/

category: History
date: 2015-05-21 21:16:56 PDT
---

On this episode, we dive back into the world of Joseph Smith to find out
how the Book of Mormon came to life. From persecution in Palmyra, to
haraguing in Harmony, to flim-flamming in Fayette, Joe moves wherever he
can find sanctuary to "translate" in peace. We've covered where the
content in the BoM might have come from, but not how it actually came to
life. The time period from Joe getting the plates in 1827, up to mid
1829, faces the white hot light of scrutiny in this mother lode of
history, and textual analysis. 

Website nakedmormonismpodcast.com     
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism     
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311     
  
Patreon patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music used with permission 

Welcome to the 17<sup>th</sup> episode of the Naked Mormonism Podcast,
my name is Bryce Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me.

Last historical episode was a bit of a doozy. We covered the View of the
Hebrews authorship theory, which was completely separate from the
Solomon Spalding authorship theory for the Book of Mormon. The View of
the Hebrews was a book written in 1823 by Ethan Smith with a second
edition print in 1825. The timeline of it's authorship, juxtaposed to
Joe's story with the Book of Mormon being translated seemed to have a
lot of coincidences.

This theory of authorship is espoused by most critical Mormon scholars
today, as it is the most compelling, and evidence based theory of any
that have been proposed. But the View of the Hebrews being a primary
source material for the Book of Mormon, wasn't the only thing we covered
last episode. There are almost 800 verifiable, anachronistic plagairisms
directly from the old and new testaments. The names of the geography in
the Book of Mormon directly reflect an early 19<sup>th</sup> century map
of New England and the surrounding areas. This would have been the map
that Joe had access to during one of his multiple brief stints in school
while growing up. These were only a few sources listed, the
possibilities go on for days.

The episode finished out with a list of dozens of possible source
material books that were written anywhere from 150 years before Joe was
born, up to just a couple years before Joe's BoM dropped. Based off the
abundance of evidence for the source material for the BoM, we can easily
ascertain that it was, by no means, an original book.

That being said, I don't think we have standing to claim that any one of
these sources was the single primary source for the BoM. While Joe
definitely took more material from some sources, than he did from
others, there's really no way of telling all the materials he pulled
from. I think Joe was one of the great information sythesizers of his
day. He was capable of reading something, and retaining the information
quite well, and then he expounded upon whatever it was that he learned.
The BoM is merely the manifestation of what was going on inside Joe's
mind at the time, and a reflection of his beliefs and world view.

Personally, I believe that 'Manuscript Found' by Solomon Spalding was
the source that Joe pulled most of the form and structure of the BoM
from, while the theology contained in the BoM probably came from View of
the Hebrews and other books, or preachers, that were popular in the
burned over district during the time leading up to authoring the Book of
Mormon. That being said, there is one massive chink in the armor of the
Spalding theory, that is the lack of tangible manuscript evidence. We
don't have a copy of the source text, known as 'Manuscript Found', as
it's believed to have been squirrelled away, or burned by Hingepin
Sidney Rigdon. That's why the View of the Hebrews stands above the
Spalding theory in most scholarly realms. There are thousands of copies
of the View of the Hebrews in existence, and we can compare it apples to
apples with the BoM, as opposed to indirect comparison with the Spalding
Manuscript.

There are so many things to talk about when it comes to the authorship
of the BoM. I can scarcely wrap my mind around everything that I want to
talk about. I don't even understand a lot of the ins and outs of what
lies inside that gold lettered, blue bound tome of fairy tales. That
being said, there's way more actual history to get to, without focusing
on the BoM itself. So, this is what we have to focus on. I'm not going
to dive all the way in to the content of the BoM, because there is
waaaay too much to talk about there, and it gets really dry. So what
I'll do instead, is continue on with the history, and how the book was
actually written, so we can advance the timeline of the actual people.
Don't think that I'm ignoring everything that needs to be talked about
when it comes to the BoM. There's enough there to fill dozens of hours
of podcasting time. But, like I said, examining the BoM with that level
of detail gets overbearing and dry really quickly.

So, what I've decided to do, is continue in the timeline itself, and
revisit the BoM authorship, once we know more about Joe and the other
people that were involved with the book. I'll probably end up doing the
BoM analysis as separate, special edition episodes, just to keep with
the main timeline of the people and history of the church. Maybe, if
patronage gets to be enough, I'll release a short episode every other
week talking about just the Book of Mormon, but we'll see.

Well, let's get into the actual history by talking about the Newlyweds,
Joseph Smith, and Emma Hale Smith. The last time we were talking about
these two, Joe had just pulled the 200+ lb. plates out of the ground and
ran home with them under his arm. He encountered a few dudes that were
bigger than him, two of which had guns, yet Joe was able to knock em the
fuck out with a couple god-mode super power punches. Once Joe had the
plates safely home in Palmyra, He and Emma experienced a ton of
"persecution" from Joe's fellow treasure diggers that all reckoned Joe
owed them a piece of the plates. The phrase "There's no honor among
thieves" does seem to fit the situation quite well. Joe embraced the
meaning of this phrase by "borrowing" $50 from Not-So-Smarty-Marty
Harris, so He and Emma could move in with the Hale family in Harmony,
Pennsylvania and escape the persistent inquisition of the local
vegabonds.

When Joe and Emma moved in to the Hale residence, Isaac Hale, Emma's
Dad, had a condition or two that needed to be met. So let's hear what he
has to say.

This is from Isaac Hale's affidavit in Mormonism Unveiled by E. D. Howe
1834.

"Smith stated to me, that he had given up what he called
"glass-looking," and that he expected to work hard for a living, and was
willing to do so. He also made arrangements with my son Alva Hale, to go
to Palmyra, and move his (Smith's) furniture \&c. to this place. He then
returned to Palmyra, and soon after, Alva, agreeable to the arrangement,
went up and returned with Smith and his family.

![](https://user.xmission.com/~research/about/blank.gif)Soon after this,
I was informed they had brought a wonderful book of Plates down with
them. I was shown a box in which it is said they were contained, which
had, to all appearances, been used as a glass box of the common sized
window-glass. I was allowed to feel the weight of the box, and they gave
me to understand, that the book of plates was then in the box - into
which, however, I was not allowed to look." 

I've quoted this before, but there's a lot more to this affidavit, and
we're really going to get into it for today's episode.

"I inquired of Joseph Smith Jr., who was to be the first who would be
allowed to see the Book of Plates? He said it was a young child. After
this, I became dissatisfied, and informed him that if there was any
thing in my house of that description, which I could not be allowed to
see, he must take it away; if he did not, I was determined to see it.
After that, the Plates were said to be hid in the woods."

Real smooth move by Joe there. Isaac said that He wanted to see the
plates, so Joe let him hold the box that the plates were supposedly in,
but wouldn't let him sneak a peek. After that didn't satisfy Isaac, He
told Joe that he wouldn't allow Joe to keep such a thing in his house,
if Isaac couldn't see and examine the plates for himself. So what did
Joe do? He supposedly hid them in the woods, and effectively the entire
translation was done without the plates in the same room as Joe at any
time.

Joe must have been a pretty shady guy from the Hale family perspective,
but of course, Emma had her love tinted glasses on, and couldn't see Joe
for what he really was. If only she would have taken a step back and
looked at the situation objectively for a moment. If only she would have
listened to her family when they talked about Joe. Apparently tensions
were high in the Hale household with Joe living there. To help
Illustrate this point, let's hear what Alva Hale, Emma's brother, had to
say about the situation. 

This is quoted from Alva Hale's affidavit, which was also in Mormonism
Unveiled by E.D. Howe.

"Joseph Smith Jr., told him that his gift in seeing with a stone and
hat, was a gift from God, but also states "That Smith told him at
another time that this 'peeping' was all damned nonsense. He (Smith) was
decieved himself but did not intend to deceive others; --that he
intended to quit the business, (of peeping) and labor for his
livelihood." That afterwards, Smith told him, "he should see the plates
from which he translated the Book of Mormon," and accordingly at the
time specified by Smith, He (Alva Hale) "called to see the plates, but
Smith did not show them, but appeared angry." He further states, that he
knows Joseph Smith Jr. To be an imposter, and a liar, and knows Martin
Harris to be a liar likewise."

That was in Mormonism Unveiled as well, a few pages after Isaac Hale's
testimony. Alva didn't like Joe anymore than any of the other Hales did,
with the exception of Emma of course. Joe's presence seemed to anger
most people in the family, so what turned out to be the best solution in
Isaac's opinon? Kick Joe out. But, Emma wouldn't stay without Joe, so,
an agreement was made. Emma and Joe would buy, and move in to the vacant
home of Jesse Hale, who had recently moved to Illinois, which was on one
corner of the Hale property. This allowed Isaac, and the rest of the
Hales, to keep an eye on Emma while they got to know Joe a little
better. 

Once they moved into this house, Emma became the first unofficial scribe
for Joe. I'm not sure exactly what happened directly after this, as it's
easy to lose the truth in the muddled testimonies of the Hale family
versus that of Joe. But what we do know is NSSM swooped in to become the
first official scribe for Joe, soon after Emma called it quits. It may
have been because Isaac didn't approve of Emma being the scribe for
Joe's evil book, as he later described it. Or it may have been by
persuasion from Marty himself for want of oversight. The catalyst for
Marty's presence isn't very clear. But we do know that he showed up
shortly after Emma and Joe moved into their new home, in order to
finance and help with the translation. 

Let's hear what happened next from more of Isaac's 1834 testimony. 

"About this time, Martin Harris made his appearance upon the stage; and
Smith began to interpret the characters or hieroglyphics which he said
were engraven upon the plates, while Harris wrote down the
interpretation. It was said, that Harris wrote down one hundred and
sixteen pages, and lost them."

This is referring to the point in time when Marty took the 116 pages
they had completed home to show his wife, Lucy Harris. We'll let Isaac
advance us further into the storyline in a minute here, because he's
doing such a good job of it. But for now, let's get the 116 page
manuscript story out in the open to find out what really happened.

I'm taking this story directly from the LDS.org website article on the
topic, as it seems to tell the story, as reported from a believing
Mormon perspective, quite succinctly.

"<span id="anchor"></span>From mid-April to mid-June 1828, the
Prophet [Joseph Smith](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/joseph-smith) was
translating the gold plates while living in Harmony, Pennsylvania. A
wealthy farmer and businessman named Martin Harris was acting as scribe
while Joseph translated the [Book of
Mormon](http://www.mormon.org/beliefs/book-of-mormon). Martin was 22
years older than Joseph and had given Joseph and Emma $50 (which was a
substantial amount of money at that time) to relocate to Harmony, where
Emma’s [family](http://www.mormon.org/values/family) lived, thus helping
to support Joseph while he translated the plates. In February 1828,
Joseph allowed Martin to take copies of characters from the plates to be
authenticated by two professors in New York City (Dr. Mitchell and
Charles Anthon). Lucy Harris, Martin’s wife, had become increasingly
concerned about Martin’s interest and financial involvement in the
translation of the plates. She and others began to pressure Martin for
evidence of the plates’ existence. To satisfy their concerns, in
mid-June Martin requested that Joseph allow him to take the 116 pages of
manuscript they had completed to show as evidence."

Then it references Doctrine and Covenants 3:1–3 and relates a
hypothetical for the readers of this article. Listen to how it's
written, the article is titled, "Joseph Smith learns that the work of
God cannot be frustrated". I'm not sure exactly what that means because
if humans can 'frustrate' God, it's a rather petty God and probably
isn't worthy of worship. But, that's beside the point.

<span id="anchor-1"></span>"Think of situations when you might be
tempted to listen to a friend rather than follow the counsel or
commandments of Heavenly Father. For instance, you might be tempted to
allow a friend to copy your homework or be tempted to watch an
inappropriate movie or video on the Internet with your friends (I have
never watched internet porn with a friend before... it gets waaaaay too
awkward when you whip it out). Why is it sometimes difficult to resist
friends when they ask you to do something you know is wrong?

<span id="anchor-2"></span>By mid-June 1828, the Prophet Joseph Smith,
with Martin Harris as scribe, had translated 116 pages of manuscript
from the gold plates. Martin asked Joseph to allow him to take the
manuscript to “read to his friends that \[perhaps\] he might convince
them of the truth”. Joseph approached the Lord with Martin’s request but
was told not to let the manuscript out of his possession. Martin
convinced Joseph to ask again—which resulted in a second refusal from
the Lord. Martin prevailed upon Joseph to ask once more and, on this
third request, the Lord gave permission for Martin to take the
manuscript if he agreed to show the manuscript only to his wife and a
few select family members. (Wait, wasn't the premise of this article not
listening to the temptations of your peers? It kind of sounds like God
had nothing to do with granting permission, but Joe might have just been
listening to his friend and caved. Besides, what bargaining chip did Joe
have when it came to persuading Marty to continue with the work? Marty
was the one with the money to finance the publication of the book....)
However, Martin broke his oath and the manuscript was lost. Because
Joseph had not accepted the Lord’s initial counsel but delivered “that
which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man”
([D\&C 3:12](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/3.12?lang=eng#11)),
Moroni took the plates and the Urim and Thummim from the Prophet.
However, Joseph was told that he could receive them again if he would be
“humble and penitent".

Any never-mo's listening probably didn't pick up on it, but I sure felt
it. That article was written in the same exact way that a bishop would
chastize you for watching a rated R movie at a party. I don't know what
it is, or how to explain or quantify it, but reading this article made
my blood boil with recollections of bully pulpit chastening from every
church leader that taught with these bullshit metaphors. Sorry for the
digression, but I thought it was worth mentioning how mad this made me,
without even knowing exactly why.

So let's talk about the article itself, what exactly happened here?
Basically, NSSM's wife was incredulous about the reality of the plates,
and the BoM as far as it had been translated. So, she demanded that
Marty get the plates from Joe. She wasn't buying the bullshit and wanted
to see some goddamn gold that this punk from Palmyra had supposedly
found. Well, Marty asked for the plates and Joe obviously turned him
down because Joe's set was way more make-shift and shitty than would
pass any scrutinizing inspection from anybody. But, Marty was able to
convince Joe to let the 116 page manuscript, which comprised the Book of
Lehi, out of his hands for a couple of weeks so Marty could take it
home, and show it to Lucy. Well, like we learned previously, She didn't
buy it and probably hid them, or tossed them into the flames when Marty
wasn't looking.

This caused the angel Moroni to be pissed and take away Joe's ability to
translate the plates "for a season". But, along came Mr. Oliver Cowdery,
heretofore, and henceforth reffered to as Cowdung Allover, or Ollie for
short. As soon as Ollie came along, the angel Moroni magically granted
Joe the ability to translate again, and boy oh boy did he. Ollie moved
into the newlywed home with Emma and Joe and the authorship went
apeshit-nutballs.

Let me pause for a second to cover the dates up to this point. I want to
offer some perspective of the order of events.

Joe had reportedly received the plates on, or about September 21, 1827.
He didn't actually take them home yet, he had just dug them out of the
stone box in the ground, and supposedly hid them in a stump, or log or
something. 10 days later, Emma told Joe that the plates might be in
danger, because the treasure digging group had hired Samuel Lawrence to
help them seek out the plates, while Joe was out of town. This was a big
fuckin problem. If you remember, Samuel Lawrence was the guy who went
with Joe to hill Cumorah a couple of years earlier, and persuaded Joe to
say that he saw a pair of 'specks' (spectacles) buried in the stone box,
along with the plates.

In reaction to Lawrence being the ringer to help the treasure diggers
find the plates, Joe went back home to bring the plates to the Smith
residence, safe and sound, without Samuel Lawrence, or any other money
diggers harming him or the plates. He did this despite walking them 3
miles through the forest at night, and being attacked 3 times. Joe did
actually get hurt a little bit.... he dislocated his thumb when he
knocked out the last guy with the final super punch of DOOM\!

The next few weeks were hell for the Smith family, especially the
newlyweds. The treasure diggers never stopped trying to get ahold of the
plates. They even hired Sally Chase with her vibrant green seer stone to
help them find the box the plates were supposedly in, while they were
stashed under the floorboard of the coopers shop on the Smith property.
This persecution made Joe consent to moving in with the in-laws in
November of 1827. NSSM gave Joe $50 to help Joe pay off some of his
debts and move to Harmony, Pennsylvania.

Marty gave them a couple of months to settle in. They originally moved
into the Hale household, but tensions were too high, as we found out
from Isaac and Alva's testimonies, so Joe and Emma moved into Jesse's
house, probably in January of 1828. In February Marty decided to swing
by and discuss something with Joe that should have been Joe's downfall.
Joe gave Marty the 'Caractors' manuscript, for Marty to take up to
Columbia University to have NSSM's Super-Study-Smarty-Party-Pooper-Pal
Charlie Anthon verify the writing as ancient.... something, fill in the
blank I guess. We covered all the details of this interaction in episode
4 so I'm not going to re-hash it here. All that matters, is that Marty
should have known at this point, that Joe was full of monkey-shit, but
for some reason the red flags just didn't stop Marty in his blind greed.

During this time, NSSM was in New York learning that Joe was a fraud,
Joe attempted to use Emma and her little brother as scribes for
translating the book, but something didn't work out, because we don't
have any writings from this period in time. It may have made up the
first couple of chapters of the book of Lehi, but there's really no way
of knowing what they wrote down, or why Joe couldn't continue to use
them as scribes. It may have had something to do with Emma being 6
months pregnant, or it may have been intervention from Joe's father in
law Isaac Hale, or all the members of the Hale family for that matter.

Enter NSSM once again. He had returned from his New York trip,
reportedly satisfied with the authenticity of Joe's 'Caractors'
manuscript. I say reportedly because we only have record of Marty's side
of the meeting from the Joseph Smith History which is part of the Mormon
canon. Whether or not Marty was satisfied with the how legit Joe was,
didn't seem to effect Marty's motivations. What we can surmise, is He
must not have been satisfied with their persistence in translating the
book up to this point, so he basically moves in with them, and arduously
translates day after day. They started this work in April, we aren't
sure of the exact day here, but it's reported as April 12<sup>th</sup>,
1828.

Joe and Marty plug away and get the entire book of Lehi translated which
comprised the 116 page manuscript. They finished June 14, 1828, meaning
they translated anywhere from 1 and a half, to 2 pages per day. In
comparison to progress with Emma and her brother, Joe and Marty were
cookin\!

This was when Marty begged to take the 116 pages to show his wife. After
a lot of persistence, he got permission from Joe, or God or somebody,
and lost them. Or they were stolen by Lucy Harris, or another family
member, or some homeless guy... We just don't know for sure.

The next piece in the series of events gets a little muddy, so we're
going to let Isaac Hale advance our narrative up until Ollie swoops in
to save the day, by becoming the next scribe.

Still quoting from Mormonism Unveiled.

"Soon after this happened (losing the 116 pages), Martin Harris informed
me that he must have a greater witness, and said that he had talked with
Joseph about it - Joseph informed him that he could not, or durst not
show him the plates, but that he (Joseph) would go into the woods where
the Book of Plates was, and that after he came back, Harris should
follow his track in the snow, and find the Book, and examine it for
himself. Harris informed me afterwards, that he followed Smith's
directions, and could not find the Plates, and was still dissatisfied."

Joe was notorious for these little tricks. He probably told Marty that
if he had enough faith in the lord, he would be able to see the plates
to satisfy his curiousity. This wasn't the only time something like this
happened. The further we get along, we'll find out just how much Joe set
things up so he couldn't be the one to fail. If somebody wasn't
satisfied with Joe's claims, it was due to their lack of faith, and was
therefore, their problem. Joe was a diabolical menace when it came to
stuff like this. So obviously Marty wasn't deterred by the
ridiculousness of this little stunt, because we're talking about it
today. Let's find out what happened next.

"The next day after this happened, I went to the house where Joseph
Smith Jr., lived, and where he and Harris were engaged in their
translation of the Book. Each of them had a written piece of paper which
they were comparing, and some of the words were "my servant seeketh a
greater witness, but no greater witness can be given him." There was
also something said about "three that were to see the thing" - meaning I
supposed, the Book of Plates, and that "if the three did not go exactly
according to orders, the thing would be taken from them." I enquired
whose words they were, and was informed by Joseph or Emma, (I rather
think it was the former) that they were the words of Jesus Christ. I
told them then, that I considered the whole of it a delusion, and
advised them to abandon it."

Alright, let's review who Joe had said could see the plates up to this
point. According to Peter Ingersoll, when Joe first brought the plates
home, the family supposedly asked to see them. Joe fed them the line of
"You can see them but God will probably destroy you if you look at them"
like some Indiana Jones, arc of the covenant shit. So everybody in the
house got to lift the plates and feel how heavy they were but they were
always wrapped in a jacket or a cloth. Before that however, Joe had said
that on September 21, 1827 Emma would be the one to help him get the
plates, effectively meaning she would be the first person to see the
plates. But before that, Joe said that it would be his eldest brother
Alvin who would help him get the plates out of the ground. Meaning that
Alvin would have been the first person other than Joe to have seen the
plates. But Alvin died in 1825, so Joe said that the person who would
see the plates would be revealed to him at a later date. This person
turned out to be Samuel Lawrence, who went with Joe to the top of Hill
Cumorah and helped him see the specks, with the plates in the stone box.
This would have made Lawrence the first person that got to see the
plates other than Joe, and he was just a family friend, and fellow money
digger, nobody really important. After all of this, Isaac asked to see
the plates, and Joe said that the Lord told him the first person to see
the plates would be a child. We can reasonably assume Joe was refferring
to his own little squirt that was growing in Emma's tummy when this
happened. But their highly deformed baby died a few hours after birth,
so nobody was buying that line anymore. Next, Martin asked to see the
plates, and Joe put him through this bullshit shenanigan of following
Joe's footprints in the snow, into the woods to hopefully have God
reveal the plates to him. When every single last one of these ploys
failed to satisfy anybodys curiousity about the plates, Joe told
everybody that God would reveal the plates to 3 witnesses, which ended
up being a statement that Joe drafted up and had the three sign. We'll
probably get into that next episode.

If we're trying to keep a prophetic scorecard for Joe here, He's got a
big fuckin bagel on his side of the tallys. How many times did he have
to pull this smoke and mirrors shit with these people, before they
finally gave up on him? Does this sound like the workings of an
almighty, all-knowing god, or just the actions of a habitual liar, with
a megalomaniacal God complex? 

Speaking of habitual lying, let's read the next thing in Isaac Hale's
affidavit talking about Joe.

"The manner in which he pretended to read and interpret, was the same as
when he looked for the money-diggers, with the stone in his hat, and his
hat over his face, while the Book of Plates were at the same time in the
woods\!"

A person may wonder how Isaac knew the details of Joe's methods of
money-digging. Remember, the Hale residence is where the whole treasure
seeking crew stayed when they were hired by Bossman Josiah Stowell to
look for the Spanish silver mine along the banks of the Susquehanna
river. That was when Joe met Emma back in late 1825. Isaac must have
hated Joe's lying face every time he saw it. And Isaac was one of
multiple people that reported Joe translating the plates by looking at
Precious in Mr. Hat, in the exact same way he spent most of his time
looking for buried treasure, which method, he was arrested and went to
trial for. He was so clearly a fraud, and we can see that by July 1828,
before he even started composing the Book of Mormon with the help of
Ollie, and everybody else. It doesn't even take opening up the BoM
itself to realize how much of a flimflamming fuck Joe was.

Isaac is doing a great job of moving us along, so let's leave him to do
his thing.

"After this, Martin Harris went away, and Oliver Cowd\[e\]ry came and
wrote for Smith, while he interpreted as above described. This is the
same Oliver Cowd\[e\]ry, whose name may be found in the Book of Mormon.
Cowd\[e\]ry continued a\[s\] scribe for Smith until the Book of Mormon
was completed as I supposed, and understood."

That brought us up to where Ollie came to live with Emma and Joe in
their newly bought house. But, there were a couple of interesting things
that happened in the interrum period from Jul 1828, to April
5<sup>th</sup> 1829 when Ollie showed up to help. There is one more
paragraph to Isaac Hale's affidavit, and we'll finish it momentarily,
but we have to cover that period that he glossed over right there.

After NSSM lost the pages, God supposedly became angry with him and Joe
and directed the angel Moroni to take the plates, along with the Urim
and Thummim translators away from Joe. I personally believe this was
just a cop-out. Let me propose what I think happened. The common
consensus is that Lucy Harris took the 116 page manuscript and burned
it, or gave it to a friend to hold on to. While this does make sense, I
think there's a possibility that Marty might have had a little more to
do with it, than historically portrayed. 

Think about it, wise business men try and vindicate the person they are
about to go into business with, and let's face it, Marty might have been
trying to do the same thing, and then blamed his bitch of a wife when
things didn't turn out like he expected. What I mean is, Joe and Marty
had just spent the last two months straight writing these 116 pages. Do
you really think Marty would just let them out of his sight? Or do you
think that he had a scenario in his mind of what a real prophet would
have done. If Joe were a real prophet, translating from real plates, he
would be able to recreate everything that they had just spent their time
composing, word for word. But, if he was just liar, then his mortal
memory would never have been up to the task of recreating the entire 116
page Book of Lehi. I personally believe that Lucy and NSSM Harris came
up with the handy little scheme to authenticate Joe. I bet that if Joe
had started translating again, and perfectly recreated, word-for-word,
the first few chapters of the Book of Lehi, NSSM might have pulled the
116 pages out of bag, and told Joe, I just wanted to make sure that this
book is indeed from God. I think that we sell Marty short if we consider
his wife the only person responsible for this clever little ploy.

But, instead of gaining the verification that He was looking for, Marty
got the run around from Joe every which way till sunday, and never ended
up completely satisfied. So, what did Joe do? He cooked up a story about
God being pissed about Marty losing the pages, and taking away Joe's
toys "for a season". Joe was probably able to use his kid dying as an
excuse to not work on the plates for a while, and Marty ended up going
home to Manchester N.Y. Empty handed, with his pockets lighter than when
he left for Harmony. 

Not only that, but Marty was a prolific farmer in Manchester. Most
farmers would say that the most important season of the year is spring
time. If you don't keep to the schedule of getting your crops in the
ground in spring, the entire season is fucked. Well, Marty had just
spent all of April, May, and June scribing for Joe. The consequences of
this are born out in Lucy Mack Smith's personal memior on page 132,
wherein she claimed that two-thirds of NSSM's crop was lost. She said it
was destroyed by a thick fog that seemed to signify God's wrath for
losing the manuscript, but it could also be because Marty was completely
neglecting his farm all spring long, because it was almost 300 miles
away from Harmony, PA. He just wanted to hang out with Joe and chase the
big bucks with Joe's new Jesus book.

But Marty's butt-fucking didn't stop with lost time and crops. Joe and
Emma were living off Marty's dime the entire time he was there, which
adds up after a while. Not only during Marty's stay at their house, but
also during a lot of Ollie's stay with Joe and Emma. Marty financially
backed every single thing that the team needed from 1827, all the way
until he gave up on the translation in the summer of 1828. Joe bled
Marty dry. But honestly, I have a hard time feeling bad for Marty. He
may have been the victim here, but the red flags were all over the
place, and at some point, we have to hold Marty responsible for being
the unwitting fuckwit he really was.

To help illustrate this point, let's finish the last paragraph of
Isaac's affidavit.

"Joseph Smith Jr. resided near me for some time after this, and I had a
good opportunity of becoming acquainted with him, and somewhat
acquainted with his associates, and I conscientiously believe from the
facts I have detailed, and from many other circumstances, which I do not
deem it necessary to relate, that the whole "Book of Mormon" (so called)
is a silly fabrication of falsehood and wickedness, got up for
speculation, and with a design to dupe the credulous and unwary - and in
order that its fabricators might live upon the spoils of those who
swallowed the deception."

Live upon the spoils of those who swallowed the deception...... Holy
fuck, if only Isaac could see then, the church that little fucking book
made today, 187 years after Joe and Marty teamed up. If we're keeping
track of prophetic scorecards, so far, Isaac Hale just destroyed Joe's
record in one paragraph.

One other thing that happened in the time before Ollie came along to be
the second official scribe, was an occurence that seems so small and
insignificant, that it scarcely bares repeating. But, the implications
of it, once we take a step back, are that of total destruction of Joe's
1838 testimony of the first visit. Follow me down this rabbit hole for
just a second, then we'll talk about Ollie scribing for Joe.

Joe was understandably depressed at this time in the summer of 1828.
Marty had just "lost" the 116 pages they had worked soooo hard on the
past 2 months. Joe was having a hard time coming up with more and more
schemes to make Marty believe that he was for real, or at least to
pacify Marty's concerns.

Isaac Hale, Joe's father in law, hated Joe and didn't want him anywhere
near his daughter Emma, and the tension throughout the family must have
been palpable with every interaction they had. Joe was in debt to his
father in law for the house they were living in, but hated doing manual
labor, which would have been the most sensible means to pay off the
note. He had promised Isaac that he would quit the treasure digging
business, which was the one thing that bound him to all of his friends
back home. And then, to top all of these pressures off, his first son
died a few hours after childbirth, spiraling the young newlywed family
into a depression, which effectively ripped a Jesus sized hole in their
souls that only a real church could fix. 

So, Joe signed up for the United Methodist church in Harmony. This was
the church that Emma had been attending with the entire Hale family for
most of her growing up years. Pastors in that day served as the local
psychiatrist, spiritual counsellor, and God conduit to help people
repent for their sins, or find their way back to Jesus. They were the
local wal-mart of fixes for the human condition. Joe, being the
godfearing young man he was, probably reckoned that everything
conspiring against him, was symptomatic of Satan taking over his life.
Or maybe he was just falling away from God, and needed a little
spiritual direction. So he joined this church.

Why the hell would we care if Joe joined a local Methodist church? I
would like to take this opportunity to refer everybody to Joe's account
of the first visitation contained in the JSH. 

I'm going to begin reading a little ways into verse 17, and go to the
middle of 20. Keep in mind, this was recorded happening in Spring of
1820 and was written by Joe himself.

"When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness
and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of
them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the
other--- This is my beloved son. Hear Him\! 18) My object in going to
inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I
might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of
myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood
above me in the light, which of all the sects was right (for at this
time it had never entered into my heart that all were wrong)--- and
which I should join. 19) I was answered that I must join none of them,
for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that
all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors
were all corrupt; that: "They draw near to me with their lips, but their
hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of
men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." 20)
He again FORBADE me to join with any of them; and many other things did
he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time."

At the age of 14, Joe supposedly went into the woods to ask god which
church he should join, and JESUS HIMSELF IN PERSON, with GOD STANDING
NEXT TO HIM "FORBAAAADE" Joe from joining any other church. Being the
skeptic that I am, if God, and Jesus were to descend from the clouds
over my head, I would listen to what they have to say. After the spell,
I would probably try to find more of whatever it was that I was on, but
if this happened for real, and then I was given some gold plates and a
chestplate with some magic glasses, all by the power of god, I would do
whatever the fuck those "Personages" told me to do. You would have to
kill me before I denied what had happened, and disobeyed the wishes of
these guys. But Joe, the prophet of the restoration of the true gospel
of Jesus Christ, directly contradicted what Jesus supposedly told him in
person. I have to admit, Joe is really good at shooting himself in the
foot when it comes to revelations that contradict themselves, or reality
in general. But, I guess I can't really blame him. He was going through
a tough time, and probably needed a sense of community. Besides, that
first visitation story wasn't recorded until 1838. How the hell would
Joe be able to remember the couple of months that he went to a methodist
church after his kid died, it wasn't a big deal. Or maybe he thought
that nobody would ever look up his membership in any other churches in
the area once he released this 1820 story. 

Alright, that's the end of that rabbit hole, but I figured it was *at
least* a slight contradiction of the recorded events, as opposed to what
actually happened, and *at most* was evidence of another one of Joe's
bold-faced lies. Plus, it's a good thing to talk to missionaries about.
When they tell you that Joe was 14 years old and went into the woods to
ask God about all the other religions, and Jesus said they were all
abominations and their professors are wholly corrupt, ask them "if
that's the case, why did Joe join the United Methodist church in
Harmony, PA less than 2 years before he released the Book of Mormon?
Doesn't this seem like a glaring contradiction to God's will? I thought
Joe was the second most perfect man on the planet, second only to Jesus,
but he directly contradicted Jesus' explicit direction." I would love to
see how an apologist, or missionary would try to weasel their way out of
that one.

Anyway, let's get back to the storyline and away from this rabbit-hole
of counter-apologetics. In mid-late 1828 we have a few interesting
things happen with other big players than just Joe. I'm going to go
through these pretty quickly, so buckle in. In late Summer of 1828 we
had Lorenzo Saunders reportedly sighting Sidney Rigdon at the Smith
residence in Palmyra, N.Y. And in fall, our buddy Ollie Cowdung moved
from VT to tutor Joseph Smith Sr. (Big Daddy Cheese) who was his
3<sup>rd</sup> cousin once removed, and Ollie customarily boarded with
the Smith family during this time. Big Daddy Cheese reportedly told
Ollie about the plates at this time stating that "A marvelous work is
about to come forth". Ollie also initiated into Free Masonry at the end
of 1828.

In February of 1829, Big Daddy Cheese visited Joe in Harmony, PA and had
a revelation that "A marvelous work is about to come forth". All of the
players were beginning to fall into place. D-Day David Whitmer and Ollie
met in Palmyra, N.Y., and discussed the story of Joe and the gold
plates. We can also presume that Sidney Rigdon went to visit his family
in Pittsburgh, PA on his way back from Palmyra in late 1828, which would
put him walking right past the Hale residence where Joe and Emma were
living at the time. Rigdon went back to Mentor and converted Parley P.
Pratt in early 1829 to Campbellite Baptist, and started preaching
baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. One quick thing to
mention that's waaay back in the storyline, is Sidney Rigdon mentioning
to his fellow preachers Adamson Bentley, and Alexander Campbell that a
golden bible will come forth. Bentley recalls it happening in 1827, and
Campbell recalls it as 1826. It was probably in the winter of 1826, as
Rigdon had moved from Pittsburgh, PA to Bainbridge, OH a little earlier
that year. 

Back to early 1829. After Big Daddy Cheese had visited his son Joe in
Harmony in mid February, Joe received divine revelation in March that he
should resume translating the plates, and that the lord would provide a
scribe for this task. Magically, Ollie shows up in April of 1829. Let's
read what Joe recalled on that morning of April 5, 1829

This is from the JSH verse 66.

"On the 5<sup>th</sup> day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to my
house, until which time I had never seen him. He stated to me that
having been teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided,
and my father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to
board for a season at his house, and while there the family related to
him the circumstances of my having received the plates, and accordingly
he had come to make inquiries of me. 67) Two days after the arrival of
Mr. Cowdery (being the 7<sup>th</sup> of April) I commenced to translate
the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me."

Do you guys want to know what I think? I personally believe that Joe was
ready to throw in the towel after NSSM lost the transcript. Like we
talked about earlier, Joe's life was in the shitter since mid 1828, and
he didn't have any way of authoring the BoM without NSSM watching over
as the scribe, and he knew he would be found out. Well, I think that
Ollie, Hingepin Rigdon, D-Day David Whitmer, and Big Daddy Cheese wanted
to convince Joe otherwise. I think that was the nature of Big Daddy
Cheese's visit in February, to convince Joe that the Book was worth all
the work that it would take. It was probably around this time that
Hingepin Rigdon gave Joe the edited copy of Manuscript Found, presuming
Rigdon had it, after he had editing it for production. After that, Ollie
came along with all his book learnin's and his marked up copy of The
View of the Hebrews. I think things were coming together as originally
planned, and Joe's lack of motivation for translating was the final
sticking point. But, for once, Joe listened to his dad about going
through with something, and the gigantic task of the BoM authorship,
officially began.

The church reports that the entire BoM was written in the 60 working day
period from April 7<sup>th</sup>, to late June 1829. The reason I say 60
working days when this was obviously more than 60 calendar days, is
because of some other things that happened that held up the crew. Like
on May 15<sup>th</sup> when Joe and Ollie decided that they needed to
baptize and ordain each other into the Aaronic priesthood. Or on May
25<sup>th</sup> when they baptized Samuel Smith, one of Joe's little
brothers. I suppose I should have mentioned this earlier, but Sam Smith
was good friends with Ollie at this time, and went with him to Harmony,
PA, to meet Joe. I believe that he was living with Emma, Joe, and Ollie
as well, given the timeline. Well, like I said, some things held them up
a little bit, like lack of space inside the little home of Jesse Hale
that Joe purchased from his father in law Isaac. So D-Day David Whitmer
became the solution that everybody needed. Up to this point, it's
assumed that Ollie and Joe were translating about 3 to 4 pages per day,
which is hauling some serious ass, in comparison to how things were
going with NSSM. Oh, by the way, Marty had been barred from ever helping
with translating the BoM ever again because of his supposed
transgressions. Well, the roughly $100 that he gave Joe and Emma to help
with moving, and living expenses was drying up, especially with 4 people
living under the one roof. In late May 1829, Joseph Knight Sr., a person
we haven't heard from in a while, whose carriage Joe and Emma stole the
night of September 21, 1827, to supposedly go get the plates, actually
brought some supplies, and a little bit of change to the overcrowded
house to help support them a little bit longer. Those supplies didn't
last long.

Thankfully for everybody, D-Day David swooped in on, or about June 1,
1829 to move Joe, Emma, Ollie and Sam to the Whitmer household in
Fayette, N.Y. Here, Joe would find sanctuary from his father in law
trying to collect on the mortgage note that Joe signed, and they would
all be able to live free of charge, without worrying about daily chores,
or working for money. 

Even better than not having to worry about the usual frustrations of
being a productive member of society, Joe found a house full of willing
scribes and servants that bought whatever he sold, no matter how crazy
it was. Joe's luck was really starting to turn around by this point, and
not a moment too soon. Once they moved in here, it's theorized that they
were translating somewhere between 8 and 10 pages per day. There are
over 500 pages in the current BoM and they were able to write it in
about 60 days.

But, they didn't translate the book from beginning to end starting with
1 Nephi and ending with Moroni. They translated the second half up to
the end, and then translated the first half up to where they had
started. This might not make a lot of sense, so let me try to explain.
First off, I need to cover what Mormon supposedly abridged from to
create the golden plates where the entire Book of Mormon was supposedly
translated from. But I'm going to list these chronologically, and
reference where it's found in the Book of Mormon.

First off we have the Jaredites. The journey of the Jaredites is
recounted in the Book of Ether, which is the second to last book in the
BoM. Joe kind of pulled a reverse Tarentino and told the earliest story
at the very end of the book. The Jaredites supposedly came across an
ocean in submarines, which took almost a year (344 days), around 2500
B.C., supposedly before the tower of Babel fell, meaning their language
wasn't corrupted. They wiped each other out and left the first set of
plates that we're aware of. To be precise, they left 24 metal plates and
a stone tablet, found by the Mulekites. They were found in the land
Northward, supposedly among the ruins of the destroyed Jaredite
civilization.

So that's the first set of plates that Mormon had to abridge into the
Golden Plates. To get to the next set, we have to fast forward 1400
years to 600 B.C. Here, we come to the story of Lehi's family in
pre-destruction Jerusalem. Lehi's family was directed to leave before
Jerusalem was destroyed. They journeyed into the wilderness, but
realized they forgot something. So, the family made camp. Lehi, Sariah,
Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi were the names of all the family members,
customarily, no daughters names were listed. Lehi sent these four boys
back to Jerusalem to obtain the brass plates from the evil King Laban.
These plates were said to hold the records of the family, which probably
meant that they were a brass plate version of the Pentateuch, with some
Isaiah in it for some reason. After a bunch of back and forth, Nephi,
the youngest brother, finally obtained the plates by smiting off the
head of the passed out drunk King Laban, and tricked Laban's servant,
Zoram, to let him have the plates. So this is the second set of metal
plates with religious inscriptions that we have brought over to the
American continent. Not only did they supposedly exist in the possesion
of Lehi's family, but Nephi also transcribed some of the content into
the 1<sup>st</sup> and 2<sup>nd</sup> books of Nephi in the Book of
Mormon. Those are the first two books. There's a good reason for this,
but hang in with me for a minute because I'm trying to build a big case
here. 

So we have the 24 Jaredite plates, and the plates of brass, but how do
we know about the exodus of Lehi's family in the first place? Well, that
brings us to our third set of plates. What we read in the Book of
Mormon, was taken from the gold plates which was Mormon's abridgement of
all the relevant plates he could find. But, the entire record of Lehi's
family, and the descendants are included in a set of plates called "the
small plates". Don't let that name fool you, because according to the
Book of Mormon, we are talking about hundreds, if not, thousands of
these metal plates with inscriptions on them, that cover the birth and
death of dozens of cities, thousands of people in warring tribes, and
countless rulers in a system of theocratic judges spanning from 600
B.C., to 150 B.C. Remember, Mormon just abridged all the important parts
into the Gold plates which is what Joe supposedly had. These small
plates make up the first six books of the Book of Mormon. That's 1, 2
Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni. 

Then, in between Omni, and Mosiah, we have a little book of one chapter
with 18 verses in it called Words of Mormon. This book was supposedly
written in 385 A.D., and describes who Mormon is, and the task he's been
given. But, that's not the only thing it does. It uses a guy named King
Benjamin to clean up the mess made by the time Omni comes along, and
helps the book transition into the next book, called the book of Mosiah.
The way Mormon does this, is he says he's going to start abridging from
the large plates, whereas he's been pulling from the small plates before
now. The large plates are the 4<sup>th</sup> set of plates referred to
by this time, not including the Gold plates themselves.

The large plates contain the following books: Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, and
3<sup>rd</sup> and 4<sup>th</sup> Nephi. These supposedly make up the
"Large Plates", and if you've read the Book of Mormon, you'll know why.
Because Alma never fucking ends.... After 4<sup>th</sup> Nephi, there's
a book called "The Book of Mormon" not to be confused with the Book of
Mormon itself. This little Book of Mormon inside the Book of Mormon is
Mormon's testimony of what is happening in a huge battle that's
commencing between the Nephites and the Lamanites. Mormon dies in this
battle, and hands off the Gold plates in their unfinished form to his
son Moroni, so he can finish abridging all the records of the nation
onto the Golden plates. This happened around 420 A.D..... that's right
420, look it up.

Moroni immediately jumps in to the Book of Ether, which is the record of
the Jaredites that we talked about earlier. Somehow Moroni found these
plates that were 2900 years old at this point, and was able to translate
them from the uncorrupted gods language (reformed Egyptian), onto the
surfaces of the Gold plates. The book of Ether is one of the smaller
books in the Book of Mormon even though it covers the trials and
tribulations of an entire ancient race of people on the American
continent, complete with cities, and buildings and all. 

After Moroni translates this book into the book of Ether on the Gold
Plates, he adds in his own little tidbit book, called the book of
Moroni, to finish off the entire Book of Mormon, and wrap things up into
one nice little package. He also inserts his own little call to prayer,
saying that if you read the Book of Mormon and pray that God will reveal
the truthfulness to you, that you'll get a burning in your bosom, or
some other vague emotive confirmation. That pretty much covers the
chronology and the basic supposed source material for the Book of
Mormon, and explains how it all came together into one set of Gold
plates, by the hands of father and son, Mormon and Moroni.

So if we consider the timeline as a whole, why was it written so
disjointed and weirdly. Why was the very beginning of the story
shoehorned in as the second to last book? Why does Mormon pop in at the
end of the small plates to help us transition into the large plates?
What the fuck is going on?\! None of it seems to make any sense.

Well, let's look at it more critically with some inferences of our own.
Considering what we know about Joe's authorship timeline, first, Joe was
translating the book of Lehi with NSSM as his scribe in Harmony. Once
these were lost, or stolen, or hidden from Joe, or whatever happened to
them, God took away Joe's ability to translate "for a season". Then, Joe
was scared that somebody still had the 116 pages that Marty took, so he
received divine revelation from God, with the perfect solution.

I'm going to read an excerpt from Doctrine and Covenants section 10,
which was actually one of the earliest revelations from Joe that we have
record of. I'll read vs 28-45 to bring in the context of Joe's mindset.
Hopefully it will be as clear to you as it is to me, that Joe was in
full defensive mode, trying to get Marty to believe that "He was too for
realsies"(Childish voice)

"**28 **Verily, verily, I say unto you, wo be unto him
that liethto deceive because he supposeth that another lieth to
deceive, for such are not exempt from the justice of God.

<span id="anchor-3"></span> **29 **Now, behold, they have altered these
words, because Satan saith unto them: He hath deceived you—and thus
heflattereth them away to do iniquity, to get thee to temptthe Lord thy
God.

<span id="anchor-4"></span> **30 **Behold, I say unto you, that you
shall not translate again those words which have gone forth out of your
hands;

<span id="anchor-5"></span> **31 **For, behold, they shall not
accomplish their evil designs in lying against those words. For, behold,
if you should bring forth the same words they will say that you have
lied and that you have pretended to translate, but that you have
contradicted yourself.

<span id="anchor-6"></span> **32 **And, behold, they will publish this,
and Satan willharden the hearts of the people to stir them up to anger
against you, that they will not believe my words.

<span id="anchor-7"></span> **33 **Thus Satan thinketh to overpower
your testimony in this generation, that the work may not come forth in
this generation.

<span id="anchor-8"></span> **34 **But behold, here is wisdom, and
because I show unto you wisdom, and give you commandments concerning
these things, what you shall do, show it not unto the world until you
have accomplished the work of translation.

<span id="anchor-9"></span> **35 **Marvel not that I said unto you: Here
is wisdom, show it not unto the world—for I said, show it not unto the
world, that you may be preserved.

<span id="anchor-10"></span> **36 **Behold, I do not say that you shall
not show it unto the righteous;

<span id="anchor-11"></span> **37 **But as you cannot always judge
the righteous, or as you cannot always tell the wicked from the
righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace until I shall see
fit to make all things known unto the world concerning the matter.

<span id="anchor-12"></span> **38 **And now, verily I say unto you, that
an account of those things that you have written, which have gone out of
your hands, is engraven upon the plates of Nephi;

<span id="anchor-13"></span> **39 **Yea, and you remember it was said in
those writings that a more particular account was given of these things
upon the plates of Nephi.

<span id="anchor-14"></span> **40 **And now, because the account which
is engraven upon the plates of Nephi is more particular concerning the
things which, in my wisdom, I would bring to the knowledge of the people
in this account—

<span id="anchor-15"></span> **41 **Therefore, you shall translate the
engravings which are on the plates of Nephi, down even till you come to
the reign of king Benjamin, or until you come to that which you have
translated, which you have retained;

<span id="anchor-16"></span> **42 **And behold, you shall publish it as
the record of Nephi; and thus I will confound those who have altered my
words.

<span id="anchor-17"></span> **43 **I will not suffer that they shall
destroy my work; yea, I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater
than the cunning of the devil.

<span id="anchor-18"></span> **44 **Behold, they have only got a part,
or an abridgment of the account of Nephi.

<span id="anchor-19"></span> **45 **Behold, there are many things
engraven upon theplates of Nephi which do throw greater views upon my
gospel; therefore, it is wisdom in me that you shouldtranslate this
first part of the engravings of Nephi, and send forth in this work."

Is it starting to make sense yet? Remember eariler when I detailed the
books and talked about this little tiny book in between Omni and Mosiah
called Words of Mormon. I said it seems to clean up the mess that is
made by the time we get to Omni. What I mean by that is, in like 8
verses, King Benjamin wipes out thousands of Lamanites in multiple
cities, effectively hitting the reset button on the Nephite, Lamanite
dynamic. Well, in my opinion, this is because Joe remembered the basic
storyline that he had talked about in the Book of Lehi, which was the
116 pages he translated with Marty, and he knew that he had to cover all
the main points he'd talked about in that manuscript so far. But,
because it was written from a different perspective, that of Lehi's son,
Nephi, the details in between the larger events, could be totally
different as they were written from a different person's perspective.

By doing things this way, Joe was able to cover his tracks, while still
preserving the same basic storyline to an extent that NSSM would
believe. Joe did something else, that was absolutely genius, to cover
his tracks. He altered the order in which he authored things, to make
them fit better with what had to be included in the beginning part of
the book, leading up to King Benjamin. When Ollie came along, and they
started working together, they began translating from Mosiah, and worked
their way to the end of the book. After that, they went back and
translated from the beginning, 1 Nephi, and worked their way up to Omni,
which was the end of the small plates, and was also the end of the
storyline that was included in the 116 pages that Marty supposedly lost.
Coincidentally, Omni goes to page 143 in the current BoM, which would
equal to right around 115 pages if it were written on foolscap paper,
which the 116 page book of Lehi was. Isn't it odd how it just fits right
in like that. 

After Joe, Ollie, Samuel Smith, D-Day David Whitmer, John Whitmer, and
Peter Whitmer were done writing everything up to Omni, Joe included the
little hingepin book "Words of Mormon" to tie everything together, as
best he could, anyway. 

At the end of the book of Mormon, Moroni takes the completed Gold Plates
to the hill Cumorah and buries them there. Fast forward about 1400
years, and this is the same Hill Cumorah that Joe supposedly dug the
plates from in 1827, after being visited by the Angel Moroni frequently,
starting in 1823. As the story goes, there was a massive battle on this
hill. Millions of Native American Jews slaughter each other with swords,
spears, and arrows. Most of them are equipped with leather or metal
armor. Moroni is literally the last Nephite left that hasn't been slain
or turned dark skinned due to iniquity, and is doomed to wander the
wilderness, until God sees it fit to finish him off. His book basically
ends by saying "alright, I'm just gunna go off in this corner and die
now, so don't shed any tears for me", and the Book of Mormon is over.

That pretty much covers the authorship of the Book of Mormon and it
explains why it's so disjointed and weird, and nonsensical. So let's
take a minute to talk about the plates. I'm not talking about the Gold
Plates, I mean the other ones. 

The supposed oldest plates, are the 24 that the Jardites recorded on
that were found by the Mulekites, and later abridged by Moroni into the
book of Ether. They were supposedly written in god's language which is
the reformed Egyptian that Joe loved and talked about so much. 

Then we have the brass plates, which were a metallic copy of a
significant portion of the Old Testament. They were probably written in
ancient Hebrew, like most copies of the Old Testament were and included
everything leading up to Jeremiah. We can infer this, because Isaiah is
the book just before Jeremiah, and Nephi quotes extensively from Isaiah
in 1<sup>st</sup> and 2<sup>nd</sup> Nephi, once he gets the brass
plates from Laban. According to my KJV, Isaiah ends on page 941. I know
that Ancient Hebrew doesn't contain any vowels, but it couldn't have
been* that* much shorter than how many pages are in the current Bible. A
quick google search brings up a metal weight calculator. If we are
extreeeemely generous with the limitations of the calculation, the brass
plates would have come in at just under 300 lbs. That's with 700 sheets
of 5"X7" plates of low quality brass that are one mm thick. Nephi was
pretty buff to carry those with him for miles from Jerusalem, to where
his family was camped out in the wilderness. But, he probably didn't
have anybody attacking him along the way, so he didn't have to waste any
strength on super-powered knock out punches like Joe did. 

Next we have the small plates, which were recorded on...... Ummm.... I
don't know what kind of metal. It doesn't specify. Nobody knows what
metal the Nephites used to record the history on the small plates. But
there were probably thousands of them. They were the recordings of every
Nephite historian that lived on the American continent from around 600
B.C., to 150 B.C. Everything was included, down to every time there was
a battle, or a warring tribe took over a new area, or a judge changed
position, or a prophet was called to preach repentance to the Nephites,
or Lamanites, or Zoramites, or Amalekites, or any of the other ites.
This would have been thousands of records, all abridged by Mormon into
the Gold Plates, luckily for us.

Then we have the Large plates, which cover the destruction and
overtaking of dozens of cities, both large, and small, by warring native
tribes. Jesus appears on the American continent and preaches gobbledy
gook nonsense about repentance and following him, all conveyed with
waaaaay too many 'Verily's'. Just like the small plates, we don't have
any record of what these plates were made out of, as it isn't specified
anywhere. We can reasonably assume that they were the same material as
the small plates were written on, but there's no way of knowing for
sure. If we look at the current Book of Mormon, which is a translated
version, of the abridged version of all these plates, and compare the
small plates section, to the large plates section, just by sheer
quantity of information, the large plates portion of the BoM is about 3
times the size of the small plates portion. So if there were hundreds or
thousands of engraven plates of information for just the small plates,
then there must have been a significant amount more source plates to
comprise the large plates section of the book. This would reasonably
mean tens of thousands of metal plates used as source material for the
latter 5 books. These were presumably all written in ancient Hebrew,
because the Native Americans are supposedly descended from the family of
Lehi which fled Jerusalem in 600 B.C. 

After all this, we get to the Gold plates. The most impractical and
idiotic metal to try and use as a book. It's abridged from all these
thousands and tens of thousands of plates that are supposedly hidden in
some cave somewhere in North America. Mormon, and then Moroni carried
these fucking things around the wilderness for years fleeing death from
the evil, dark-skinned Lamanites. And somehow, Mormon was able to read
all these records of plates, and compile them all into the Gold Plates,
while still on the run. Not only that, but he would've had to translate
everything from ancient Hebrew, to Reformed Egyptian, so Joe could read
it all in one language and translate it into Elizabethan English in the
mid 1800's. The only book that wouldn't have been translated from
ancient Hebrew, was the book of Ether, because it was written by people
who didn't have their language corrupted by the Tower of Babel falling.
But that was included by Moroni, Mormon's son and it's like 15 chapters
long, 6 if you are looking at the original 1830 print of the Book of
Mormon.

The reason I seem to be talking about this so redundantly is so you, the
listener, can really understand, and appreciate how ancient record
keeping went in the Book of Mormon. Because it didn't happen like this
ANYWHERE ELSE ON THE FUCKING PLANET. Nowhere have we found ancient
plates of Brass, Steel, Bronze, Gold, Aluminum, Iron, or any other metal
or alloy that's anything like what's in the Book of Mormon. NOWHERE\!
Only in Joes fairy tale, do we hear about ancient religious texts being
carved into metal plates\! Metal was way too rare and hard to make in
the ancient world. The supposed brass plates that contained almost 85%
of the old testament didn't even exist in the pre-Roman middle east. The
earliest evidence we've found of brass plates containing any Jewish
religious text was in India, from 1024 A.D. They were so crude and bulky
that the 55 plates that were found weighed 216 lbs and had a mere 2500
lines of text on them. NOWHERE in all of history and archeaeology, do we
find anything like what the Book of Mormon talks about. The way the Book
of Mormon supposedly got to us is truly, by all means, impossible and
completely, fucking ridiculous. Is this really THE MOST CORRECT BOOK
THAT EVER EXISTED?\! If the Mormon God is real, I'm gunna have a few
questions when I die....

Just now, I only talked about the lack of existence of inscribed metal
plates, as religious or historical texts. Now, let's talk about the Hill
Cumorah itself. Remember how I said there was a massive final battle
there with millions of people, with swords, and armor, and shields, and
all kinds of metallic wartime furnishings. Well, those don't just
deteriorate when buried in the ground for some 1600 years, nor do the
bones of millions of slain soldiers. Why don't we just dig into the
supposed Hill Cumorah a couple of feet to unearth countless piles of
priceless ancient artifacts? If the LDS Church claims that the Book of
Mormon is truly the most correct book on the planet, which they
emphatically do, the archeaological evidence buried in that hill would
instantly verify everything that the book claims. Why haven't we dug it
up yet? Fuck it, give me a back hoe and a ground penetrating radar
system for a week, and I'll damn sure find what we're looking for, and
that's without a massive team of archeaologists. I'll even do the work
pro-bono. I'll pay for the back hoe rental. I'll replace the dirt after
I dig it up, provided I don't find anything with the digging. I'll even
preserve the sod and lay it back down exactly how I found it when I
start the digging. I'm dead goddamn serious about this offer. I will be
happy to be the first person to dig into that hill, and verify the
claims in the Book of Mormon. I'll even publicly apologize to the Mormon
church presidency for anything fallacious I've said in this podcast with
regards to the sheer lack of evidence.

Please don't think I'm joking when I say this. I'll take a week off work
and pay for the plane ticket to do it. I'll cover all the expenses and
the time just for the sake of pursuing knowledge. Let's make this shit
happen\! 

Oh, wait..... we can't... in fact, nobody can even come near that hill
with a fuckin teaspoon to try and excavate any evidence for, or against
the Book of Mormon. The Mormon church owns it and has placed a massive
granite monument, somewhere near where they think Joe, might have, maybe
dug up the plates. And please don't think that this hill is miles wide
and thousands of feet tall like a small mountain that's just called a
hill. It's a dinky little mound of earth with a big white spire with a
gold angel Moroni on top of it. It's barely big enough to ice-block or
sled down. If you happened to lay on your side and roll from the top to
the bottom, you'd only be moderately dizzy from the experience. Superman
could leap it with the propulsion from one fairly sizeable burrito fart.
A few thousand people could scarcely stand on the hill, let alone a few
million people battle and die on it. Yet this is the most important hill
in all of Mormon history, and the original housing ground of the
precious Gold plates, chestplate, Urim and Thummim, and possibly even
the sword of Laban. 

The address of the hill is apparently 603 State Rd. 21, Palmyra, N.Y. If
there are any listeners in New York that happen to live near this, or
know where this is, I think it would be awesome for you to get a selfie
with the hill in the background, and post it in the comments section of
this episode on facebook. I know this is probably asking a lot, and
probably nothing will ever come of it, but it's worth a shot at least. 

So let's talk about why Joe was so fascinated with hills in the first
place, to close out this episode. We need to talk about mound builder
mythology. I've made reference to it a few times without explaining what
it is very well. 

The time frame we have been talking about up to this point, was during
an age of European migration throughout the American territory. Along
with this migration, came an insatiable need for exploration. The
unexplored American territory was a land of untamed wilderness and
unkilled savages. To put some perspective on this localized knowledge of
the western territories, Lewis and Clark had only returned from their
grand 2 year exploratory mission in 1806, merely a year after Joe was
born. Much like playing a real time strategy video game, the fog of the
unknown territory, was often terrifying, or at very least, it sparked
the interest, and speculation of a lot of people.

Well, with all this exploration, people were finding and uncovering all
kinds of elaborate ruins, and amazing feats of ancient engineering and
architecture. In South and Central America, dozens of ancient,
uninhabited ruins and pyramids were being found by explorers. Last
historical episode, when we talked about the source texts for the Book
of Mormon, I listed dozens of books at the end of that episode, that had
a theme of general inquisition concerning the origin of these ruins. 

Well.... The people at the time had a certain opinion of the red-skinned
savages that inhabited the land. They believed that these evil and
unruly people could never be responsible for creating such amazing works
of architecture and art. After all, they were just tepee dwelling nomads
that cut the scalps off any white skinned person that came near them
right? Well, this was the motivated reasoning behind mound builder
mythology

People, not just lay people, but educated people that devoted their life
to studying these ruins, surmised that there must have been some other
explanation for these things coming into existence. I mean, come on, the
Indians weren't smart enough to do anything this cool. Some people
excavated Mammoth bones and asserted that they were bones from an
ancient race of giants that built everything.

Others found artifacts that were Spanish, and thought they were
deposited there thousands of years before, by the people that built the
ruins. Some even had the crazy idea of ancient Jews sailing across the
ocean to the void American continents, for the sheer purpose of
multiplying and replenishing this new promised land. But let's face it,
that's just stupid. 

Well, some of these ruins, were actually buried in hills from normal
weather and erosion, and had to be excavated. But, geographical and
meteorological studies were nowhere near where they are now. We have
natural ways of explaining why these ruins were buried now, but all they
could do back then, was say some intelligent being was responsible for
what they were finding. Of course the Natives were far too stupid to
handle such a task, so obviously, it was some race of white people, or
giants, or something.

There are some other nuances to the full mound builder myth, but that
covered the basics of it to an extent that we can be satisfied with for
now.
