---
layout: post
title: >
    CC - Mark Hofmann pt 1
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/cc-mark-hofmann-pt-1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/cc-mark-hofmann-pt-1
category: History
date: 2016-08-11 18:51:27 +0000
---

Intro 8/11/15

CC - Mark Hofmann pt. 1

On this episode, we take a break from the historical timeline to examine
a person that has been shrouded in mystery since making his way onto the
Mormon historical scene in 1978; Mark Hofmann. He’s a man responsible
for manufacturing an unknowable number of forgeries and selling them to
the Church and other private collectors. All of his actions eventually
lead up to 3 bombs going off, killing two people and severely injuring
Hofmann himself. This is part one and it gets us up to the Salamander
Letter in 1984, a year and a half before bombs start going off.

Show Links:  
  
Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music by Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/  
  
Show Artwork http://weirdmormonshit.com/  
  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Links:

Second Anointing  
<http://www.utlm.org/images/tracking/trackingp3_templeritual.gif>

Joseph Smith III Blessing  
[<u>http://www.mormoninformation.com/blessing.htm</u>](http://www.mormoninformation.com/blessing.htm)

Gordon B. Hinckley Conference Talk  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZeLRsGLJz7w&list=PLClOO0BdaFaMJgXD--epQ4wWIqN4rRifk&index=9>

September 9, 1984 Deseret News “Church” section  
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=glgnAAAAIBAJ&sjid=94IDAAAAIBAJ&pg=7092%2C3139859>

Dallin Oaks CES Symposium defending Salamander letter  
<http://www.utlm.org/onlinebooks/trackingconfessions2.htm>

Tracking the White Salamander with color coded source texts of
Salamander Letter  
<http://www.utlm.org/onlinebooks/trackingch1.htm#ULM'S INVESTIGATION>

September 1, 1984 Deseret News article titled “Letter”  
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=UwEomQ3UdWgC&dat=19840901&printsec=frontpage&hl=en>

Today’s episode is a Special Clean Cut episode about a notorious,
somewhat infamous person in Mormon historical realms. While attending
Sunstone Symposium on the 28<sup>th</sup>, I had the amazing opportunity
of sitting down and speaking with Mormon historians in a one-on-one
setting. Last episode featured audio clips from Grant Palmer, D. Michael
Quinn, H. Michael Marquardt, and a few other fantastic people. Sunstone
was a great setting to meet all of these people that have been so
prominent in my own Mormon research for 3 and half years now. They were
all quite willing to sit down and discuss their work or elaborate on
their current projects, like in the case of D Michael Quinn’s Mormon
money book that’s on the way.

There was one more audio clip I recorded while there, that wasn’t played
last episode, because I believe it deserves its own full episode. Sandra
and Jerald Tanner have spent decades on the forefront of Mormon
historical study, and the body of knowledge they’ve built is astounding.
While Jerald unfortunately passed nearly 10 years ago, Sandra is still
on the forefront of Mormon scholarship and historical studies and
remains quite active in the community.

On a personal note, one of the first resources I began consuming when I
became fixated on Mormon history, some 3.5 years ago, was a TV show
called Heart of the Matter with Sean McCraney. That TV show used to do
heavy Mormon historical studies, now it’s just devolved into a preaching
and ministry show. But, the information in the earlier episodes is
invaluable and heavily backed by the work Sandra and Jerald Tanner have
done under the umbrella of Utah Lighthouse Ministries, found on
UTLM.org. The Tanners are responsible for spurring enough interest in
Mormon history for me to begin this podcast so I have them and their
work to thank for literally changing the direction of my life with their
body of research.

While at Sunstone, I had the opportunity to sit with Sandra Tanner and
discuss some of her work, as well as attend a panel discussion, during
which she presented, about the Book of Mormon authorship and plagiarism.
Well, I was also able to snag her and talk for over half an hour about a
topic that is shrouded in mystery for me, Mark Hoffman. I’ve known some
of the highlights of Hoffman for some time, but never have I actually
studied him in detail to understand the scope of his work and everything
he did. Well, luckily for us, Sandra was happy to share her perspective
as the events were unfolding with Hoffman in the early to mid-80’s.

The discussion I recorded with her is incredibly informative, and it
serves to enlighten us to who Mark Hoffman was and some of the
underhanded deals he did, but I feel like there is a much deeper story
worth giving a look. I really want to understand what it was like in the
80’s when the Hoffman bombs went off and people were confused about what
was going on. So the format of today’s show will be as follows: first,
we will listen to the audio clip of the discussion about Hoffman with
Sandra Tanner, Second, we’ll study everything we can find from that time
to dive further into the information to which Sandra introduced us, and
third, we’ll look at the implication of Hoffman’s work on the larger
body of historical studies to see what kind of effect he had on Mormon
history as we know it.

First off, let’s listen to the audio recorded between Sandra and myself
at Sunstone Symposium on the 29<sup>th</sup> of July. She’ll introduce
us to the topic and give us a brief overview of Mark Hoffman, which
we’ll use as a jumping off point to further our research.

Play Sandra Tanner audio

Alright, that was the audio with Sandra so let’s dive into part two of
this Mark Hofmann episode and use everything Sandra talked about as a
jump off point for further research. I have a feeling like this is going
to be a lot of information to cover and have therefore opted to split it
into two episodes instead of making it one 6-hour episode or something.
Today’s episode will introduce us to Mark Hofmann and other relevant
individuals surrounding him, while next week’s episode will cover the
bombings and historical fallout of his actions.

To get us started, let’s introduce our protagonist for the episode, Mark
Hofmann.

He was born on December 7, 1954 in SLC, Utah. At age twelve he purchased
his first piece of Mormon history being a Kirtland Safety Society bank
note signed by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. This shows us that from a
very early age Mark was drawn to historical artifacts and old documents,
especially when they related to Mormon history.

On November 27, 1973, Hofmann was called to serve a mission to the
England Southwest Mission, which involved the areas of Portsmouth,
Bristol, and Bath. While on his mission, he engaged in the hobby of
collecting old books and sending them home for use after his mission.

He enrolled in the Spring 1976 semester of Utah State University in
Logan, Utah.

This is when Mark Hofman enters our timeline as a distinguished
individual, and where the discussion with Sandra picked up in the
previous audio. Around June of 1978 Hofman went to the UTLM Bookstore
just south of I-80 on 3<sup>rd</sup> west in Salt Lake City in order to
attempt to sell Sandra a copy of the Second anointing. (Read second
anointing)

<http://www.utlm.org/images/tracking/trackingp3_templeritual.gif>

It was Hoffman’s plan to have UTLM publish the second anointing document
in their work to help establish his legitimacy. They refused to do so
because they didn’t have the pedigree of the document, nor did they even
know the name of the person that gave them the photocopy. They were
skeptical of Hoffman as early as 1978.

Hofmann made a copy of the Second Anointing document and left it with
the Tanners, showing that he wasn’t in it for the money at the time, but
instead was trying to establish himself as a legitimate historical
document dealer.

In April of 1979, almost a year after he first talked with the Tanners
and picked up their book “Mormonism – Shadow or Reality,” Hofmann wrote
a college essay in the form of a letter to his mother, in which he was
very critical of the church’s history and how it was discussed and
taught among believers.

It’s a challenge to try and ascertain motives for somebody’s actions
without asking them directly. Hofmann refuses to meet with anybody today
to discuss his motives or any of his actions in the 70’s and 80’s,
however, I think we can look at this time before he began really
engaging in Mormon document forgery to gain some insight as to why he
did what he did. A lot of people are frustrated when they leave the
church and learn the real history. I think Mark felt this same
frustration when he began researching Mormon history. I believe he began
to research the history from sources other than the church and found
inconsistencies with how the church reports the evidence, which may have
spurred action on his part. We’ll try to analyze the deeper motives
later on in the discussion about Hofmann, but just keep in mind that he
was a strongly believing member of the church, obviously quite
intelligent, went on his mission, and upon returning found out just how
convoluted Mormon history really is.

Sometime in October of 1979, Hofmann sold that Second Anointing document
of which he gave a photocopy to Sandra Tanner, to a man named Jeff
Simmonds for $60. Hofmann sold the document with the caveat that
Simmonds couldn’t tell anybody where he had acquired the document from.
It was only after Jerald Tanner compared it to their photocopy years
later that it was found to be one of Hofmann’s forgeries.

This seemed to be a recurring theme with Hofmann. He would come up with
a document, whether a letter, signature, or some other antique writing
of importance, and wouldn’t detail from where he acquired the document.
He seemed to always come up with some kind of excuse like he got it from
a trade with another collector, or he found it in the pages of an old
book in a second-hand bookstore or something like that. When it comes to
old documents like this, they have to have a pedigree to be legitimized.
We have to be able to track where the document came from, and how it got
to our hands today in order for it to be a legitimate document. The vast
majority of Hofmann’s documents lacked this crucial piece of legitimacy,
which only seemed to really surface once his documents started to be
questioned 4.5 years after he sold this Second Anointing document to
Jeff Simmonds.

Hofmann knew that documents like this needed to be substantiated with a
line of pedigree, and in his early days of forgery he tended to pay more
attention to that detail. He wouldn’t have the time to do so later, but
beginning in 1980, we see that he was aware of the need for a document
pedigree to determine where it came from.

On April 16, 1980 Hofmann showed his wife a 1688 bible he’d acquired on
his mission to England. He was sure to point out that some of the pages
were stuck together, which would seem fairly odd because the rest of the
pages weren’t sticking together. Two days later Hofmann took this same
bible to Jeff Simmonds, the Utah State University archivist and showed
him the pages that were stuck together. They pulled the pages apart and
miraculously discovered an old Mormon document. If we remember all the
way back to episode 4 of this show, we discussed a guy named Charles
Anthon, a bible scholar at the University of Columbia in New York that
met with Martin Harris in 1829.

To bring everybody up to speed on the story, in 1829 Martin Harris had
reservations about funding the publication of the Book of Mormon and
therefore asked Joseph Smith for a copy of some of the reformed Egyptian
hieroglyphics that were on the gold plates. Joseph produced a piece of
paper with characters arranged in columns, as well as some kind of
circular sigil. This document is nowhere to be found today, and the
“caractors” manuscript we do know of was copied by David or John
Whitmer at a later time. If we had the actual Anthon transcript, we
would have characters that were supposedly on the gold plates, copied by
the hand of Joseph Smith in print, but the document appears elusive and
seems to no longer be extant. When Martin Harris met with Charles
Anthon, Anthon warned Harris that he was being preyed upon by rogues
because he couldn’t recognize the characters as any language whatsoever.
Needless to say, if Hofmann had found the actual Anthon document stuck
in the pages of a bible, it would be a very rare and valuable document
to determine what language Joseph supposedly saw on the Gold plates.

When Hofmann and Simmonds separated the pages in that old bible and
found the Anthon Transcript, it rocketed Hofmann to Mormon historical
fame. Less than a week after they “found” the transcript, Dean Jessee of
the Mormon Historical Department in SLC accepted the document as
legitimate, marking Hofmann’s first big score.

Hofmann went on in the following months to legitimize the pedigree of
the 1688 bible that had the Anthon Transcript stuck between its pages by
going to a woman named Dorthy Dean, living in Carthage, Ill. Nobody can
know what was said during this discussion between Hofmann and Ms. Dean,
but he left with an affidavit signed by her stating the bible must have
come from her mother, which somehow linked the bible back to Joseph
Smith or Martin Harris, the details are a bit fuzzy to me. Hofmann was
attempting to establish his credibility and knew that he needed to
produce some kind of line of possession or pedigree with the Anthon
Transcript if he was going to demand a proper price for it.

Once Hofmann had the signed affidavit from Ms. Dean, the Church
considered it valid, and Hofmann cashed out with his first big find. Up
to this point he had been manufacturing signatures and other small
documents to trade with other collectors, but never had he attempted a
forgery this grand, and when he did successfully, it paid off.

On October 13, 1980, 6 months after Hofmann and Simmonds “found” the
Anthon transcript, Hofmann sold it to the church for a five-dollar gold
coin minted in 1850, an 1830 first edition of the Book of Mormon, and
several specimens of pioneer currency from the early Utah years. For
this one little scrap of paper that probably took Hofmann a few hours to
forge, the Church gave him over $20,000 worth of antiques in trade,
which is about $60,000 of today’s money. This was a home-run for
Hofmann, but only marked the beginning of what the next 5 years would
hold.

On January 8<sup>th</sup>, 1981, 3 months after this huge score,
something amazing happened that would have an impact on the Hofmann
timeline later on. On this day, Hofmann was arrested for stealing a bag
of sliced almonds from a grocery store in Salt Lake. This may seem
ridiculous that a guy that just made a huge score with a forged document
would steal something so petty, and I’m nowhere near equipped to try and
psychoanalyze such a fascinating mind, but the reason this matters is
because it established a criminal record for Hofmann, meaning the police
department took his fingerprints and attached them to his name and
record.

He must have paid the fine or whatever was necessary because the next
entry we have in his chronology is important to his next big historical
document “find”. One month after his arrest for the bag of almonds
incident, Hofmann called H. Michael Marquardt, the same Marquardt that
sat down with me to discuss Martin Harris on the Symposium wrap-up
episode. Hofmann sought to inquire of Joseph’s whereabouts on January
17<sup>th</sup> 1844, 5 months before his death in Carthage. Two days
later, Marquardt calls Hofmann back and tells him he was at home for a
few days in the middle of January.

Two days after Marquardt gave Hofmann this information, Hofmann
approached a church archivist named Donald Schmidt with a photocopy of a
faded 1844 document from that time in mid-January, which appeared to be
the text of a blessing Joseph gave to his son, Joseph Smith III. This is
the text of that 1844 blessing that Hofmann “found,” that Joseph Smith
supposedly gave to his son Joseph Smith III, the contents of which are
extremely important given what happened after Joseph’s death.

http://www.mormoninformation.com/blessing.htm

“A blessing, given to Joseph Smith, 3rd., by his father, Joseph Smith
Jun., on Jan. 17 1844.

Blessed of the Lord is my son Joseph, who is called the third,- for the
Lord knows the integrity of his heart, and loves him, because of his
faith, and righteous desires.  And, for this cause, has the Lord raised
him up;- that the promises made to the fathers might be fulfilled, even
that the anointing of the progenitor shall be upon the head of my son,
and his seed after him, from generation to generation.  For he shall be
my successor to the Presidency of the High Priesthood:  A Seer, and a
Revelator, and a Prophet, unto the Church; which appointment belongeth
to him by blessing, and also by right.

Verily, thus saith the Lord:  if he abides in me, his days shall be
lengthened upon the earth, but, if he abides not in me, I, the Lord,
will receive him, in an instant, unto myself.

When he is grown, he shall be a strength to his brethren, and a comfort
to his mother.  Angels will minister unto him, and he will be waffed as
on eagle's wings, and be as wise as serpents, even a multiplicity of
blessings shall be his.  Amen.”

We know that once Joseph died in the 1844 Carthage shootout, there was
what we call a succession crisis. Nobody knew who was the rightful heir
to the throne because many had claimed it without express written
documentation of proper succession. This letter marked the RLDS church
to be the one true church because it implies that the Lord ordained
Joseph Smith III to be the prophet once his father died in 1844, 5
months after this blessing was given. The ramifications of this being a
real document would turn the SLC LDS church on its head, because they
followed Brigham Young after Joseph’s death, instead of following Joseph
Smith III, as the lord had ordained to be the rightful heir to the
throne, according to this forged letter anyway.

When Hofmann showed this amazing “find” to SLC LDS archivist Donald
Schmidt, Schmidt was non-committal, probably being overwhelmed with the
implication of the contents, so Hofmann moved on to somebody that might
be more interested in the letter. One week after showing the 1844 letter
to LDS archivist Schmidt, Hofmann approached a man named Richard Howard,
who was the archivist for the RLDS church, which is the church that
followed Joseph Smith III after Joseph’s death.

Given the contents of that letter, it’s easy to see that the RLDS church
may have been more interested in the letter than the LDS church was,
because it expressly called the RLDS church the correct line of
authority, having passed through Joseph Smith III instead of Brigham
Young.

A few days after Hofmann showed the 1844 letter to Howard, Howard called
Hofmann and asked him to not sell the letter to anybody until the
8<sup>th</sup> of March, to which Hofmann reportedly agreed. After this
agreement was made, Schmidt, the SLC LDS archivist, called Hofmann and
agreed to buy the document on the 2<sup>nd</sup> of March. This wasn’t
the first or the last time that Hofmann would agree to something like
selling or not selling a document, and follow by violating the agreement
immediately after. In this instance, Hofmann had the RLDS church
competing with the LDS church to buy a document that determined once and
for all who the true church was after Joseph Smith’s death. Hofmann was
a devious planner to say the least.

On March 2<sup>nd</sup> 1981, the LDS church purchased the Joseph Smith
letter from Hofmann for another $20,000, a purchase authorized by Gordon
B. Hinckley, who was first counsellor to Spencer W. Kimball at the time.
I really wonder what the atmosphere was like during this time, because
there’s simply no way of knowing what was discussed behind closed doors
as these documents were surfacing, but after the SLC LDS church
purchased the letter from Hofmann, they traded it to the RLDS church 2
weeks later, and received an original 1833 Book of Commandments in
return.

There must have been some reservations about the back and forth that
happened, because very soon after this, Hofmann donated an 1865 letter
from Thomas Bullock to Brigham Young, a legitimate document, not a
forgery, possibly as a sign of good will or to remove some circulating
doubts about the documents he seemed to be miraculously finding so
frequently.

A couple of weeks after this whole deal went down among Hofmann, the SLC
LDS church and the RLDS church, the LDS church held its semi-annual
general conference, during which Gordon B. Hinckley addressed the
existence of Hofmann’s forged 1844 letter. Luckily for us, the talk is
16 minutes long and the whole thing is up on Youtube. I’m going to play
an excerpt from the beginning as well as the last minute and leave a
link for it on the show notes. This is being used for critique and
educational purposes only and falls under the fair use clause of
creative commons licensing.

Play GBH Youtube clip one
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZeLRsGLJz7w\&list=PLClOO0BdaFaMJgXD--epQ4wWIqN4rRifk\&index=9

The presidency and leadership of the church knew they couldn’t keep this
under wraps as it was circulating throughout newspapers and historian
circles. The rest of the video that I didn’t play basically argues how
the language in the blessing says nothing about Joseph III being the
successor to the throne, but is merely a father’s blessing. The final
point that Hinckley makes is that Bullock, the clerk who wrote the
blessing as Joseph was supposedly speaking it, continued to follow
Brigham Young out to Utah after Joseph’s death, and he wouldn’t have
done that had he thought Joseph III to be the rightful heir to the
office of prophet, seer, and revelator. I would merely point to the
language of the actual blessing to refute the argument: “For he shall be
my successor to the Presidency of the High Priesthood:  A Seer, and a
Revelator, and a Prophet, unto the Church; which appointment belongeth
to him by blessing, and also by right.” That’s pretty hard to contend
with, but, Hinckley didn’t read the actual language of the blessing
during his conference talk so anybody that had read newspaper stories
about this fabled letter wouldn’t be any wiser to what the letter
actually said. He concludes with this…

Part 2 of Hinckley talk

I would argue that the church was trying for all they’re worth to
conceal these Hofmann forgeries with very little success. People in the
media, as well as prominent Mormon historians, were talking about these
documents coming out that challenge the church in one way or another,
including this document that named Joseph III as Joseph Smith’s rightful
successor. Hofmann knew Mormon history, and really knew how to hit them
in a way that would hurt the overall historical narrative the Mormon
church claimed then, and continues to teach today. Hofmann knew what
screws to turn and who to turn them against to put some people in really
awkward positions, like the LDS church and the RLDS church bargaining
for a single document that challenged the succession narrative as we
know it today.

Hofmann went on in later 1981 to purchase a large collection of letters
from a man named Steve Gardiner for $20,000. This was a point when
Hofmann really mucked up the historical documents he was selling. He had
a huge collection of legitimate documents that he could sell or trade
interspersed between his forgeries, which seemed to legitimize the
forgeries. Hofmann could no longer take the time and effort to build up
a false pedigree or line of possession as he had done with the old bible
that had the Anthon Transcript stuck in the pages, he was spending too
much time buying and selling antiques and old documents to go to the
trouble of substantiating his own forgeries that he was cranking out at
an alarming rate.

It should also be said that Hofmann was becoming quite wealthy at this
time. He was really establishing himself as the go-to guy for Mormon
historical documents, all before he was even 30 years old. He had a very
promising career in Mormon history and historians that had been in the
game for some time before this were excited to see what amazing document
he would “find” next.

I think something that Sandra said during the interview is extremely
telling. She said that Her and Jerald had discussions about if it was
more probable that this 25-year old returned missionary was finding
these documents, or manufacturing them, and neither seemed probable.
Hofmann had a lot of people buffaloed and baffled because of what he was
able to do. It’s clear that he’s a genius in his own field, and was
obsessive when it came to his forgeries. The documents he was able to
manufacture were of astonishing quality. Not only did his work fool
Mormon historians and archivists, but educated people in forensics and
handwriting analysis were left with one option of saying, “well, we
can’t prove it’s legitimate, but there’s nothing saying it isn’t
legitimate”. Now, that isn’t the same as saying it’s a real document,
but to people that were writing headlines following Hofmann and Mormon
history, it was much easier to write a headline of “Mormon historians
say Salamander Letter probably real”. That sells copies. The line of,
“Mormon historians and handwriting experts say that the Harris letter
doesn’t show any prominent signs of being a forgery, but the body of
historical documents to reference it against is far too shallow to make
a realistic assessment of the legitimacy of the Harris letter, therefore
judgement should be reserved until proper chemical analyses can be
performed to ascertain the age of the ink and paper can be conducted to
verify the age of the document.” I nearly fell asleep reading that… It’s
so much more exciting to print “Salamander letter proves Joseph Smith
practiced Occult treasure digging”.

Here we see a big problem with Hofmann and his work. People were excited
to jump on his next big find and claim it as legitimate before the
proper work had been done to substantiate it as a legitimate document.
There are a few metrics one can use while determining the legitimacy of
such a document. You can reference the handwriting and signature against
the existing body of verified work, you can compare the content to see
if it shares proper language and sentence structure with what we would
expect, or you can chemically and microscopically analyze the document
to learn much more from the characteristics of the paper and ink itself.
All three of those tests need to be passed in order for a document to be
considered legitimate. Problem was, with the majority of Hofmann’s
documents, only one or two of those tests were performed, and his work
was only marginally passing those criteria. The third part, an in depth
chemical analysis of the work, served to be the Achilles heel in his
work later on, but it wasn’t being performed on his work in the early
80’s.

To get an idea of the scrutiny his work was coming against, here is a
list of people and organizations that examined his work.

| April-May 1981  | James Dibowski and Albert Somerford, forensic experts associated with the U.S. Postal Inspectors Crime Lab, authenticate Joseph Smith III blessing. The paper tests would be done by the McCrone Institute of Chicago.                                           |  |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |
| 15 May 1981     | RLDS President Wallace B. Smith announces that a team of experts has tested the Joseph Smith III blessing and established its genuineness.                                                                                                                       |  |
| 29 July 1982    | Hofmann shows Ashworth the letter of Lucy Mack Smith to Mary Pierce, dated 23 January 1829. They agree to have Dean Jessee check the handwriting of the letter prior to final purchase by Ashworth. Selling price about $33,000 in trade.                        |  |
| Nov./Dec. 1982  | Spanish Fork Co-Operative notes sold to Alvin Rust. Hofmann had prepared several sets of these undated notes, in denominations of ten cents, twenty-five cents, fifty cents and one dollar. Hofmann sold sets to various individuals at $1,500 - $2,500 per set. |  |
| 10 January 1983 | Hofmann flies to New York City. He meets there with Charles Hamilton, a well known autograph dealer. Hofmann convinces Hamilton that the 1825 letter is authentic, and he signs a statement to that effect.                                                      |  |
| 14 January 1983 | Letter of Joseph Smith to Josiah Stowell (18 June 1825) sold to LDS Church for $15,000. The letter is then placed in the First Presidency vault.                                                                                                                 |  |
| 3 March 1983    | E. B. Grandin printing contract for first printing of Book of Mormon, signed by Joseph Smith and Martin Harris (dated 17 August 1829), sold to LDS Church for $25,000.                                                                                           |  |
| January 1984    | Christensen retains BYU historians Ron and Dean Jessee to study historical context of Harris Letter. In a 24 January letter to his research team, he counsels them to seek the truth in their studies.                                                           |  |
| February 1984   | Dean Jessee's The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith appears. It contained six Hofmann forgeries.                                                                                                                                                                 |  |
| February 1984   | Alvin Rust, Mormon and Utah Coin and Currency published. It contains several Hofmann forgeries.                                                                                                                                                                  |  |

He was able to fool every one of those people into thinking he was
dealing legitimate documents. His web of lies was reaching far and wide,
catching more and more victims within his grasp. The problem is, that
web can only hold so much before it gives from the pressure. The Harris
letter, also called the Salamander letter marked the beginning of the
end for Hofmann. He did play it smart in the beginning, but I think he
became desperate.

Hofmann was living an increasingly lavish lifestyle. He had an addiction
to rare books and documents, an addiction which was only surpassed by
his addiction of conning people into buying documents he was able to
manufacture. He completed the Salamander letter sometime in November of
1983. Once it was completed, Hofmann invited H. Michael Marquardt to his
home to have dinner and discuss the letter. Marquardt was shown the text
of it, but from what I can tell, not the actual paper version of it.
There are a couple reasons Hofmann may have done this. He may have been
seeking legitimacy from Marquardt, a Martin Harris expert; if Marquardt
signed off on the Salamander letter, it would be some extra confidence
Hofmann could bring to the table when showcasing the actual letter to
people. It may seem like a remarkable letter, but if a historian the
likes of Marquardt signed off on it, it sure would make the Salamander
letter seem more legitimate.

Another possible reason to bring Marquardt in was for collaboration.
Hofmann may have presented the letter as something he was about to
acquire but acted skeptical of it with Marquardt around, questioning the
legitimacy of his own forgery to learn what a critical historian might
say about such a controversial document.

Maybe, just maybe, Hofmann was feeling out Marquardt, as the Harris
expert he is, to try and make the forgery more legitimate. If Hofmann
could find out the telling features of a Harris document that would make
it seem like a forgery, he might have been able to avoid any of those
damning tells that would identify it as a fraud, making it seem more
legitimate to the people that would be studying the letter.

Hofmann also may have wanted Marquardt as the Harris expert to be the
one to get people riled up about the Salamander letter. If Hofmann was
always the guy telling everybody about an amazing new document he found,
it may seem suspicious after a while. However, if Marquardt, a respected
Mormon historian, is the guy getting excited about this letter and
spreading word, then it disconnects Hofmann one step away from being the
person that widely publicized it.

Really, there are many reasons that come to mind that would explain why
Hofmann did what he did in having Marquardt come over to his house and
review the text of the Salamander letter. There’s no way to know for
sure his reasoning or motivations behind it, but we do know that
Marquardt was the guy that told some prominent historians about the
letter, and everybody caught the Hofmann bug again.

People began wondering what the Salamander letter said and what it could
mean for church history given the contents linking Joseph Smith to early
19<sup>th</sup> century occult practices. The whole world of Mormon
historians and scholars was caught in rapture about this letter,
wondering what would happen when it was finally released.

After Hofmann had Marquardt over to his home to talk about the letter,
Hofmann set up another one of his convoluted deals where he would
basically sell the document to two people or organizations and then only
deliver to the highest bidder. This was not the first or the last time
this would happen.

| 16 December 1983 | Lyn Jacobs, fronting for Hofmann, offers to sell LDS Church an 1830 Martin Harris to W. W. Phelps, â€œWhite Salamanderâ€ letter. President Hinckley declines, indicating the price is too high. Brent Ashworth also rejects the offer. Hofmann, â€œfrontingâ€ for Jacobs, approaches LDS Church Archivist Donald Schmidt, eventually suggesting that perhaps a wealthy church member could be found to buy it and then donate it to the Church. This middleman idea proves to be attractive. Brent Metcalfe tells Hofmann of Steven Christensen. |  |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |
| 6 January 1984   | The Harris Letter is sold to Steve Christensen and Gary Sheets. Hofmann had asked $50,000 for it but had accepted an offer of $40,000 payable over eighteen months: $1,000 down, $9,000 in two weeks, and the balance in increments of $10,000 at six month intervals.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |  |
| Late Jan. 1984   | Hofmann tells Christensen he has a cash-flow problem; if Christensen could give him the $9,000 plus $5,000 now, Hofmann will give him a bonus: the transcript of a 1 November 1825 contract in which Joseph Smith, Sr., Josiah Stowell, and other partners agreed on the division of proceeds from a money-digging enterprise they had organized to find buried treasure. Christensen agreed to advance the money in exchange for a copy of the text *and* the right to buy the original for $15,000 if and when Hofmann acquired it.              |  |

Here we see some confusing things going on, and I’m not sure how to
interpret it. Essentially, Hofmann used a front-man in a way to increase
value and drive up the bidding price. This is how I’m interpreting it,
so I could be wrong, but the way I see the plan is Hofmann had the text
for the Salamander Letter and then was able to manufacture a single
forgery.

During the discussion with Sandra she said that Hofmann would make a
deal with somebody that was buying his documents, usually LDS
historians, he would tell them that he won’t talk about the deal or even
the existence of the document, and once the deal was made, or like in
this case, before the deal was made. In order to drive up the price, he
would then leak the deal to somebody like H. Michael Marquardt with the
Salamander letter, or another historian, that he was working on
something big that the church was buying to try and suppress.

Once it was public knowledge that the deal was about to go down for the
purchase of the incriminating Mormon documents in order to suppress
them, that would suddenly drive up the demand and price for the
documents. We have to keep in mind, the price for this kind of stuff
didn’t really have a comparable market. Hofmann was producing
one-of-a-kind documents that the church wanted to buy up as quickly as
possible. There wasn’t exactly a Kelly blue-book value on essentially
blackmail, right? There wasn’t any guide that said historical documents
that are fatal to the truth claims of your religion are worth X-number
of dollars, Hofmann and the historians he was buying and selling to were
the only people putting dollar values to any of these documents.

And of course, Hofmann, who brought forward all these one of a kind
documents, had his finger on the knob in determining the size of the
market for his one of a kind items, so if he created demand by spreading
word among many interested individuals or groups, he could basically ask
whatever price he wanted.

I mean, take, for example, the trade that was worked out between the LDS
church and the RLDS church for the Joseph Smith III letter. The LDS
church bought the letter from Hofmann and traded it to the RLDS church
for an original 1833 Book of Commandments. Currently there are none of
these on the market because of such a limited original print volume. An
original 1830 Book of Mormon had 5000 copies and are going for anywhere
from $60,000 to $115,000. A first-edition Book of Commandments is
exponentially more valuable than any original Book of Mormon, because
they printed less than 100 original copies before the Independence
printing press was destroyed in 1833. The Books of Commandments have an
absolutely indeterminable value right now because they are that rare in
Mormon historical circles. As we heard from Gordon B. Hinckley in that
previous audio, the LDS church traded a first edition Book of
Commandments for the Joseph Smith III letter. Hofmann’s work was
fetching ridiculous prices, that he was determining, because he was that
good of a forger and con-man in a completely untapped market with no
competitors.

Hofmann had some part in organizing the deal between the LDS church and
the RLDS church with the Joseph Smith III Letter and the First edition
Book of Commandments. The document he forged had a relative value that
he was able to determine because it was essentially blackmail. Hofmann
adjusted the market for the Joseph Smith III letter, and he did the same
market adjustment trick to increase the value of the Salamander Letter
when he leaked its existence before selling it to Steven Christensen and
Gary Sheets.

Hofmann had a front man, named Lyn Jacobs, for the purpose of offering
the Salamander letter to Hinckley. Hinckley thought it was too expensive
so Hofmann went to Brent Ashworth trying to get a better price. After
both of them denied, the text of the Letter is released to Mormon
historians and the press grabbed ahold, making the story viral among
Mormons circles.

This drove the price up because the church wanted to buy the letter and
begin damage control as soon as possible, so Hofmann comes back to them
with a solution; just have a 3<sup>rd</sup>-party person buy it and
donate it to the church, and here enters our man Steven Christensen.
Hofmann struck a deal with Christensen to buy the Salamander letter in
installments, unfortunately Hofmann had a cashflow problem, which is
code for his living style had outclassed his income and he was a little
strapped for cash. To solve this new income issue, Hofmann sweetened the
deal of the Salamander letter with another forgery he had yet to
manufacture, which was a contract between Joseph Smith Sr. and Josiah
Stowell for their treasure hunting trip. Christensen brought in another
investor, named Gary Sheets, and the deal was done. Hofmann was
officially living on credit of Mormon historians and collectors with his
own forgeries that he hadn’t even produced yet as collateral for the
credit.

I just have to say, this doesn’t sound like something that somebody
who’s in control would do. Early on Hofmann went to the extra work of
trying to substantiate his work and establish a believable pedigree of
the document, by early 1984 he was making deals and taking money on
forgeries he hadn’t even manufactured yet. In my opinion, don’t take it
as fact, nothing but a naked Mormon opinion here, I think Hofmann was
desperate for money, and the facts in front of us seem to make that an
easy assumption.

Hofmann wasn’t able to continue his lifestyle with the work he was
producing, so he made deals he couldn’t come through on. Pardon me if
this seems a little crass or too simplistic, but doesn’t that sound like
a crackhead mentality to approach such a fragile business model?

Any one little mistake could reveal him and unravel everything he’d put
together, he had a fragile business. He was seemingly desperate enough
for money to do anything necessary, and therefore started making some
really shaky deals with increasingly epic stakes. He had his mind
focused on getting the next paycheck, instead of making quality
forgeries and covering his tracks, which should have been foremost in
his mind. I think he became careless out of desperation here, the same
way that a crackhead may go to very extreme lengths to get their next
hit, but not really pay attention to where their next meal is coming
from.

In March of 1984, I think his carelessness begins to catch up with him a
little bit.

| March 1984   | Jerald and Sandra Tanner's Utah Lighthouse Ministry, though wanting to believe the Harris letter authentic, admits to â€œsome reservationsâ€ because of its similarity to an affidavit of Willard Chase in E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unveiled\[sic\] (1834) and to a statement by early LDS convert Joseph Knight. Tanners publish long extracts from Harris letter in The Salt Lake Messenger.                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  |  |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 7 March 1984 | Steven Christensen issues a press release admitting ownership of the 1830 Harris letter but he says that he will not release it until further research is done on it. His researchers were then working on (1)examining the physical text\[they chose Kenneth Rendell of Newton, Mass., to do this\]; (2)establishing the provenance of the letter\[Dean Jessee worked back to Elwyn Doubleday, a dealer in postal memorabilia in Alton Bay, New Hampshire\]; and (3)understanding the historical context of the letter \[Ronald Walker, Dean Jessee, and Brent Metcalfe were working on this aspect\]. |  |  |

With these two dates we can see the public reaction to the Salamander
letter being split. The Tanners were apprehensive about the legitimacy
of the letter, while Steven Christensen was working with church
historians and officials to wrap their minds around the letter.

Like Sandra had said in the audio clip, Jerald Tanner was hard at work
studying Martin Harris and comparing the historical Harris to the
“Harris” that wrote the Salamander letter, noticing inconsistencies.

However, Steven Christensen was working with the church to find the
correct way to interpret the letter and wrap it into a narrative that
works with Joseph Smith’s claims of divine inspiration. It was a
challenging thing to understand that the Prophet Joseph was wrapped up
in occult practices, we don’t need the Salamander letter to draw those
connections, so these historians and apologists had to set the record
straight that a White Salamander spirit guardian over the plates isn’t
contradictory to the narrative they’ve claimed since 1842.

The Deseret News is the church’s own newspaper agency. I used to deliver
it around my neighborhood on a bicycle at 5 in the morning, so it’s a
popular newspaper to which many members of the church subscribe. The
church used the Deseret News as the first outlet for apologetics
defending the Salamander letter.

September 9, 1984 Deseret News “Church” section

“The so-called “Martin Harris letter” is no repudiation of Joseph Smith,
but rather probably is a further witness of the Prophet’s own account of
the discovery of the golden plates.

This is the feeling of historian Rhett S. James of Logan, Utah, who is
author of the pageant, “Martin Harris: The Man Who Knew,” which just
completed its five-day run at Clarkston, Utah.

A recent Los Angeles Times copyrighted story by John Dart said the
1.5-page letter purportedly written by Harris is threatening to alter
the idealized portrait of Joseph Smith.

According to the Times story, the letter reportedly says that Joseph
Smith found the golden plates, which later resulted in the Book of
Mormon, with the help of a “seer stone, a kind of magical looking
glass.”

“It also claims that Smith was prevented at first from gaining
possession of the plates by an ‘old spirit’ that had transfigured itself
from a white salamander,” Dart writes.

The letter, owned by Steven F. Christensen, bishop of the Centerville,
Utah, 13th Ward, was allegedly written by Harris on Oct. 23, 1830 to
W.W. Phelps, a newspaper editor and a potential convert. Following
Phelps baptism approximately six months later, he became editor of the
first newspaper published by the Church: The Morning and Evening Star,
first published in Independence, Mo., in June 1832.

The authenticity of the letter has not yet been established, and Bishop
Christensen said the letter will not be released to the public until
early 1985, if the letter proves authentic.

The letter, if it is proved genuine, will be released when a book on the
origins of Mormonism is released early next year,” Bishop Christensen
told the Deseret News.”

https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=glgnAAAAIBAJ\&sjid=94IDAAAAIBAJ\&pg=7092%2C3139859

This was the apologetics run-around they were scrambling to get out in
church media. Dallin Oaks spoke at a CES Symposium in 1985 saying all of
this about the letter.

"Another source of differences in the accounts of different witnesses is
the different meanings that different persons attach to words. We have a
vivid illustration of this in the recent media excitement about the word
'salamander' in a letter Martin Harris is supposed to have sent to W.W.
Phelps over 150 years ago. All of the scores of media stories on that
subject apparently assume that the author of that letter used the word
'salamander' in the modern sense of a 'tailed amphibian.'

    "One wonders why so many writers neglected to reveal to their
readers that there is another meaning of 'salamander,' which may even
have been the primary meaning in this context in the 1820s.... That
meaning... is 'a mythical being thought to be able to live in fire.'...

    "A being that is able to live in fire is a good approximation of the
description Joseph Smith gave of the Angel Moroni:... the use of the
words **white salamander** and **old spirit** seem understandable.

    "In view of all this, and as a matter of intellectual evaluation,
why all the excitement in the media, and why the apparent hand-wringing
among those who profess friendship or membership in the Church?" ("1985
CES Doctrine and Covenants Symposium," pages 22-23)”

Yeah, a Salamander doesn’t really mean a Salamander, it means a spirit
that can live in fire… I think it’s safe to say that the church and its
leadership were grasping at straws to try and rationalize the Salamander
into their own narrative. This was obviously a controversial aspect of
Joseph Smith to try and reconcile with the cardboard cutout that is so
often constructed by believers in the church. This Salamander letter was
a very challenging aspect of Mormon history for many members to wrestle
with.

To get an idea of what it was like to find out that it was actually a
forgery, I’m going to read a quote from Ronald Walker, one of the BYU
professors and church historians working on a book about the Salamander
letter. This quote was given in August 1987, after everything with
Hofmann had basically come to a close.

*“I remember sitting in a sacrament meeting several days after Mark
Hofmann had confessed... I felt an overwhelming emotional and spiritual
relief.... that white salamander that had bedeviled me for so long at
last was exorcised. I felt spiritual channels once hindered and partly
clogged renew themselves. (Professor Ronald W. Walker, Brigham Young
University, August 6, 1987)”*

For believing members, the Salamander letter was a lot to wrestle with.
They were twisting their minds into various pretzel shapes to make it
still work and believe in Joseph Smith as the prophet. Let’s face it,
believing in the Mormon church can be a very challenging thing once a
person learns about the real history. Add on to that already challenging
level of cognitive dissonance the Salamander Letter, and you have
life-long members who are locked in a downward spiral of wondering if
Joseph Smith really had the reported propensity toward the occult and
how that affected the golden plates, and in turn, how that affected the
truth of the Book of Mormon. This letter was something that forced a lot
of members to confront ugly skeletons in Joseph Smith’s closet and it
made a lot of people very uncomfortable with their own cognitive
dissonance.

Luckily for everybody, there were people like Jerald Tanner who wouldn’t
rest until they found the truth. Most of what I’m about to read is how
Jerald found the similarities between the Salamander Letter and the
possible source texts used to construct it, and the actions he took
after coming in to this knowledge. Remember, Jerald and Sandra Tanner
were, and still are in Sandra’s case, at the forefront of so-called
“Anti-Mormon” research. UTLM has been known to be a spearhead into
real Mormon historical research for decades now, constantly bringing up
challenging points in Mormon history and drawing connections between
Joseph Smith and Masonic or occult practices. The Salamander letter fit
perfectly into the narrative that Sandra and Jerald have constructed for
Joseph Smith, and had it been real, it would truly be one of the
strongest evidences they could use against the church and Joseph Smith.
They truly wanted nothing more than for the letter to be genuine, as we
heard in the conversation with Sandra at the beginning of the episode.

This is what Jerald wrote in the book “Tracking the White Salamander,”
which can be found in its entirety on UTLM.org. I’m going to read quite
a few excerpts from it so we can really understand what it was like for
Jerald to do this research at a critical time in Mormon history. Keep in
mind, the Tanners are biblical scholars and have been tracking source
texts for the Book of Mormon for decades. They’ve read and compared
hundreds of books to the BoM that sound similar, drawing comparisons and
showing the typical signs that imply forgery that are rife throughout
the Book of Mormon. Studying words on paper is about the only thing that
Sandra and Jerald had been doing for decades prior to the Salamander
Letter coming out in 1984.

“Fortunately, I was able to obtain some revealing extracts from the
letter and was preparing to print them in the March 1984 issue of
the *Messenger*. I was very excited that we at Utah Lighthouse Ministry
would be the first to break this important story to the world. While in
the midst of compiling evidence to support the authenticity of the
Salamander letter, I made a discovery that shook me to the very core. I
found that the account of the transformation of the white salamander
into the spirit was remarkably similar to a statement E.D. Howe
published in [*Mormonism
Unvailed*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismunvailed_ub017.htm).
This book, written four years after the date which appears in the Harris
letter, told of a toad "which immediately transformed itself into a
spirit" and struck Joseph Smith. Even more disconcerting, however, was
the fact that other remarkable parallels to the Salamander letter were
found just two or three pages from the account of the transformation of
the toad into a spirit (see [*Mormonism
Unvailed*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismunvailed_ub017.htm),
pages 273, 275 and 276).

    Some years before I had encountered similar evidence of plagiarism
in Joseph Smith's *History of the Church*. The Mormon Church leaders had
always proclaimed that this *History* was actually written by Joseph
Smith himself. My research, however, led me to the conclusion that the
largest portion of it had been compiled after his death. I found that
later Mormon historians had taken portions of newspapers and diaries
written by other people and changed them to the first person so that
readers would believe that they were authored by Joseph Smith himself.
In agreement with my conclusions, Mormon scholars later admitted that
over 60% of the *History* was compiled after Smith's death
(see [*Mormonism—Shadow or
Reality?*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismshadoworreality_ub001.htm)
pages 127-135).

    In any case, parallels I had discovered between the Salamander
letter and [*Mormonism
Unvailed*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismunvailed_ub017.htm) reminded
me very much of the work I had done on Joseph Smith's *History*.
Although what I discovered about the Salamander letter was not
conclusive proof that it was a forgery, it was certainly suspicious. It
seemed, in fact, to throw a real monkey wrench into all my plans
concerning the publication of the letter. Since I knew that it was very
unlikely that anyone else would spot these parallels and realize their
significance, there was some temptation to keep the matter to myself. I
knew, however, that God knew what I had seen, and I began to feel that
He had shown me these unpleasant facts to warn me against endorsing the
letter. Furthermore, I knew that I would never be satisfied if my case
against Mormonism was based on fraudulent material. It was clear,
therefore, that there was only one course of action which I could
follow—i.e., print the whole truth in the Messenger. In the March 1984
issue, therefore, we raised the question of forgery by printing the
title, "Is It Authentic?" Under this title we wrote:

    "At the outset we should state that we have some reservations
concerning the authenticity of the letter, and at the present time we
are not prepared to say that it was actually penned by Martin Harris.
The serious implications of this whole matter, however, cry out for
discussion. If the letter is authentic, it is one of the greatest
evidences against the divine origin of the Book of Mormon. If, on the
other hand, it is a forgery, it needs to be exposed as such so that
millions of people will not be mislead \[sic\]. We will give the reasons
for our skepticism as we proceed with this article."

    In the same issue of the Messenger, page 4, we made these comments:

    "Since we have been deeply involved in research having to do with
the relationship of Mormonism to magic...we were delighted to the report
that Martin Harris had written a letter relating to the subject....Some
time later, we were told of another letter, written by W.W. Phelps,
which seemed to prove the authenticity of the letter attributed to
Harris. This letter is printed in Howe's book, pages 273-274. In the
letter, Phelps tells of Martin Harris' statements concerning the Book of
Mormon. There are some remarkable parallels between the two letters.
Both letters refer to the Urim and Thummim as 'silver spectacles.' Both
accounts tell of Martin Harris taking a copy of the Book of Mormon
characters to 'Utica, Albany and New York,' and both talk of the Book of
Mormon language as 'shorthand Egyptian.' Since Phelps' letter is dated
Jan. 15, 1831 (less than three months after the letter which was
reported to have been written by Harris), it seemed safe to conclude
that Phelps used the Harris letter in preparing his own. In all
fairness, however, we made another discovery which we feel we must
report. Just two pages after Phelps letter, we found a statement written
by E.D. Howe which is strangely similar to the 'Harris' letter.

The books and articles quoted are as follows:

> 1--Mormonism Unvailed, by E. D. Howe, 1834 [<u>(purchase
> info)</u>](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismunvailed_ub017.htm)
> 
> 2--Brigham Young University Studies, Autumn 1976
> 
> 3--New Witness For Christ In America, by Francis W. Kirkham, 1951
> 
> 4--Tiffany's Monthly, interview with Martin Harris, 1859 [<u>(purchase
> info)</u>](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/interviewwithmartinharristiffanysmonthly_up034.htm)
> 
> 5--A.B.C. History of Palmyra and the Beginning of "Mormonism," by
> Willard Bean, 1938
> 
> 6--Mormonism, Magic and Masonry, by Jerald and Sandra Tanner,
> 1983 [<u>(purchase
> info)</u>](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismmagicandmasonry_ub043.htm)
> 
> 7--Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
> Saints, by B.H. Roberts, 1930

After that the article goes through the entire Salamander letter and
shows color coded similarities to those 7 sources which is remarkably
fascinating. Be sure to look in the show notes for the link to the UTLM
article from which I’m reading this to really see the possible source
texts the Salamander Letter may have been forged from. The article
continues:

“The reader will remember that the letter said, 'the spirit transfigured
himself from a white salamander in the bottom of the hole.' E.D. Howe's
statement reads as follows: '...looked into the hole, where he saw a
toad, which immediately transformed itself into a spirit,...' Notice
that both accounts use the words '**the hole**' as well as '**spirit**',
and the words '**transfigured himself**' resemble '**transformed
itself**.'...

    "That Howe's statement ([*Mormonism
Unvailed*](http://www.utlm.org/booklist/titles/mormonismunvailed_ub017.htm),
page 276) is so much like the one in the 'Harris' letter is a little
disturbing. Even more disconcerting, however, is the fact that it
appears just two pages from a letter by W.W. Phelps which also bears
remarkable parallels....As we understand it, the Church's handwriting
expert, Dean Jessee, feels that the signature was penned by Martin
Harris, but so far no tests on the paper have been completed. We feel
that the letter should be made available to other handwriting experts,
and that the public should be informed where the letter was originally
obtained. We have heard that there is a red postal mark on the original
letter and that the amount of postage is correct for a letter from
Palmyra to Canandaigua. Although the average person would have a
difficult time forging these things, there are probably a number of
people who could do the job....

    "While we would really like to believe that the letter attributed to
Harris is authentic, we do not feel that we can endorse it until further
evidence comes forth."

The article continues on and we’ll keep reading from it in a minute, but
I just want to point out something. In the audio with Sandra, I said
that I admire her and Jerald for their intellectual honest when it came
to the Salamander Letter. They wanted so much for it to be authentic
because it’s a huge nail in the coffin for Joseph Smith being divinely
inspired; the letter links him directly to occult rituals. The Tanner’s
wanted so desperately for this letter to be authentic, but they had
reservations about its authenticity, and therefore withheld judgement
until more evidence could come forward. I think this says a good deal
about their intellectual honesty and constant pursuit of truth. They
couldn’t give this letter the stamp of approval and therefore didn’t
report on it and begin building a case using the letter as evidence like
the church began doing with Oaks claiming the Salamander is just an
analogue for a spirit that can live in fire.

It just needs to be pointed out that the church was in damage control
mode, while the Tanners were in “let’s find the truth” mode. The church
bought the letter hook, line, and sinker, while the Tanner’s were
claiming that something was fishy. The next paragraph in the Tanner’s
book, “Tracking the White Salamander,” really goes to show the
frustration that was introduced with the possibility of the Salamander
letter being a forgery.

“As soon as I noticed that there were problems with the Salamander
letter, I began to realize the serious implications this would have for
the study of Mormon history. Prior to Mark Hofmann's appearance on the
scene, the documents we had used in building our case against Mormonism
seemed to have a good pedigree. For instance, the Joseph Smith Papyri
were rediscovered in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1967. Although
officials at the museum did not acquire the papyri until 1947, they had
been aware of them since 1918. The papyri could, in fact, be traced back
to the Smith family. The documents which proved that Joseph Smith was
tried as a "Glass Looker" in 1826 could be traced back to the jail in
Norwich, N.Y. Two men, in fact, signed affidavits that they were
discovered in the basement of the jail. Joseph Smith's "Strange Account"
of the First Vision, as well as his diaries, could be traced directly to
the Church Historical Department where they had been preserved.

    When Mark Hofmann came on the scene everything seemed to change.
Hofmann was vague about where his finds were coming from, and no one
seemed to think of questioning his veracity. The *Deseret News* for Oct.
27, 1985, said that Hofmann's "reputation regarding documents was
impeccable, and his friends in the historical circle defended it." It
was only after I began to have doubts about the Salamander letter, that
I began to realize that Hofmann was not providing pedigrees for his
discoveries. While Mormon scholars felt that the Bible in which Hofmann
found the Anthon transcript (it was supposed to have been pasted between
two pages) came from the Smith family, Hofmann refused to disclose where
he had bought the book. Since book collectors sometimes have a policy of
checking out every page of a rare book, I would like to have talked to
the collector to see if he remembered anything glued between the pages.
With regard to the Joseph Smith III Blessing, Hofmann only said that it
came from a descendant of Thomas Bullock. When we pressed Hofmann to
reveal which descendant (there must be hundreds), he refused to be of
any help. Lucy Mack Smith's 1829 letter, Joseph Smith's 1825 letter and
Martin Harris' 1873 letter all seem to have no pedigree. In the case of
the Salamander letter, I did learn that Hofmann claimed that it came
from a man by the name of Lyn Jacobs. I also learned that Hofmann and
Jacobs were working together in the document business. Since the
documents were all coming from these two men, it was necessary to focus
in upon their backgrounds.”

“By August 1984 I was convinced that the evidence against the Salamander
letter cast a real shadow of doubt on all the important discoveries Mark
Hofmann had made since 1980. On August 22, 1984, I printed the first
part of the pamphlet, *The Money-Digging Letters*. On page 9 of that
publication, I wrote: "...a number of important documents have come to
light during the 1980's. The questions raised by the Salamander letter
have forced us to take a closer look at some of these documents." In the
same publication I wrote the following concerning the Salamander letter:
'The more we examine this letter attributed to Harris, the more
questions we have about its authenticity." (page 6) I went on to show
important parallels between other documents and the Salamander letter. I
noted that the parallels to the Joseph Knight account (first published
in 1976) seem to be extremely important. On page 7, I told of an
interview with Martin Harris which was published in 1859: "The interview
in Tiffany's Monthly also raises a very serious question about the lack
of religious material in the Salamander letter. In the interview, Harris
quoted at least five portions of the Bible. He used the words
revelation, Moses, Scripture and Christ at least once. He used the word
prayed twice, and mentioned the devil four times. The word angel or
angels appears five times. God is mentioned seven times, and the word
Lord appears ten times. In the Salamander letter all of these words are
absent. In fact, there is nothing we can find concerning religion.
Spirits are mentioned many times in the letter, but they are never
linked to God in any way. Instead they are linked to money-digging. They
are the guardians of the treasures.

    "This total lack of religious material seems to be out of character
for Martin Harris. A person might try to maintain that Harris was more
interested in religion in 1859, but the evidence shows that he was
always that way." (page 7)

Let’s just take a second to talk about Jerald’s study of Martin Harris.
Last week’s episode had a clip from H. Michael Marquardt where we
discussed Martin Harris at great length. He always seemed like a very
religiously zealous man, always talking about God and the devil, spirits
and revelation, etc. But, the Salamander Letter, which was written a
short while after Harris self-reported walking through the woods and
speaking with God in the form of a deer for some time, has none of the
language we would expect out of Harris. This may have been the most
striking problem with the Salamander letter that was supposedly written
by this religious zealot of a man. It wasn’t just what was in the letter
that gave it away, it was also what wasn’t in the letter that should
have been there that gave it away, or at least raised flags for Jerald
in his research.

“On the following page, I charged that Mr. Hofmann had originally tried
to sell the Salamander letter "to the Mormon Church for a large amount
of money." Hofmann later told me that it was actually Lyn Jacobs who
took the letter to the church. Hofmann seemed willing, however, to admit
that he was involved in the decision to sell the letter to the church.
In any case, I went on to state: "In the past Mr. Hofmann acted under
the theory that the Church will buy up embarrassing documents to
suppress them. This is very clear from his own account of how he handled
the discovery of the Joseph Smith III Blessing. In a paper given at the
Mormon History Association, Mark Hofmann stated that he did not want 'to
come across like I was trying to blackmail the Church,' but he
acknowledged that if the Church had wanted him to, he would have
promised to never tell anyone about its discovery: ...Hofmann later
commented: 'It surprised me a bit that the Church didn't buy it up quick
and stash it away somewhere,...' (*Sunstone Review*, September 1982,
page 19)...

    "However this may be, it is reported that the Mormon Church felt
that Hofmann's price was too high on the Salamander letter and refused
his offer. The document was later sold to Steven Christensen.

    "We feel that one of the most important tests of the letter's
authenticity is its history since it was written. If Mr. Hofmann will
tell historians where he obtained the letter, then it may be possible to
trace it back to its original source." (page 8)

This is where that intellectual honesty comes in once again. Jerald was
examining the source of the document, saying if Hofmann can tell us
where he found it, it might be more believable, but instead it looks
more like he’s blackmailing the church in hopes that the church will
want to buy up and suppress these damaging documents. Jerald was only in
pursuit of the truth, even if it came in conflict with what he
personally wanted to happen.

“The day following the publication of *The Money-Digging
Letters* (August 23, 1984), Mark Hofmann came to our home and had a
long talk with Sandra. He seemed very distressed and hurt that we, of
all people, would question his discoveries. He had expected that
opposition might come from those in the church, but he was amazed that
Utah Lighthouse Ministry had taken a position which was critical of him.
Mr. Hofmann tried to explain that he could not reveal the source of the
Salamander letter because he had sold it to Christensen. With regard to
the Joseph Smith III Blessing, Hofmann indicated that he had given the
Mormon Church an affidavit which stated where he had obtained it. He
could not reveal the source to the public, however, because the member
of the Bullock family from whom he had purchased the document also had
important papers concerning Brigham Young's finances that would be
embarrassing to the church.

    Sandra felt that Mark Hofmann was almost to the point of tears as he
pled his case as to why we should trust him. He did not make any
threats, however, nor did he show any sign of being violent. At any
rate, Hofmann's explanations certainly did not satisfy me.”

This is the best part in my opinion. This is the point that Sandra was
talking about in the audio in the beginning where Hofmann was saying
something along the lines that, “if you continue to question my work
then I won’t be able to produce these Bullock letters that describe
Brigham Young’s finances and whatnot.” Sandra wanted to see what would
come up next if Hofmann continued, but Jerald was already disenchanted
and had Hofmann pegged as a fraud.

This is from a Sept 1 1984 Deseret News article titled “Letter”

https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=UwEomQ3UdWgC\&dat=19840901\&printsec=frontpage\&hl=en

“Church officials have restrained their comments about the document
because it does not belong to the church.

Though few people have viewed the original document, several have
studied typewritten copies of its contents.

The letter purportedly contains an account of experiences Joseph Smith
had in discovering the plates that became the Book of Mormon.

The letter purportedly says Joseph Smith found the plates by using a
“seer stone,” an item treasure hunters of the era were known to use in
their hunts. The purported letter is reported to say he was confronted
near the plates by an “old spirit” that transfigured from a white
salamander.

But few people seem certain of the letter’s authenticity. In fact,
outspoken Mormon Church critics Jerald and Sandra Tanner suspect the
document is a forgery, they told the Deseret News.

Jerald Tanner has not seen the actual letter but says similarities
between it and other documents make its veracity doubtful.

Tanner said he studied the typescript of the document and wanted to
believe it. But when he compared it to the 1834 book “Mormonism
Unvailed” by E.D. Howe, he found highly similar stories about Smith
viewing a toad that turned itself into a man or a spirit.

Another disturbing aspect, Tanner said, was the letter seemed out of
character for Harris. “In the entire text of the letter, there is no
mention of religion in the sense of religion as we know it,” Tanner
said.

But Tanner feels the document is an extremely important find. “It
deserves a lot of attention.” He said. “If it’s authentic, it’s
extremely important in linking Mormonism to the occult. If it’s a
forgery, then it’s important because there’s a document forger out
there.”

I think this speaks great volumes to intellectual honesty. Jerald and
Sandra wanted to find the truth about the letter. Instead of siding with
the majority that claimed it to be legitimate and damning to the Mormon
story, all the Tanners wanted was truth. If the document was real, it
has information that is challenging to the genesis of the Mormon church,
if it wasn’t real, there’s a document forger out there, and they need to
be caught and have their work exposed to clear up the muddied waters of
Mormon historical studies.

And I’m afraid this is where we need to end today’s episode. Next week
will bring the exciting conclusion to the Hofmann story, and the episode
will probably be just as long as this one. We’ve covered all of
Hofmann’s life from his birth to his biggest forgery up to this point.
He’s manufactured and sold many documents from simple signatures and
bank notes, all the way up to the Anthon transcript, Joseph Smith III
letter, and now the Salamander Letter.

We don’t have any way of ascertaining the motives behind what Mark
Hofmann did or understanding what his end game was. Personally, I think
the evidence lends credibility to the claim that he became disenchanted
with the church and wanted to catch it in a “gotcha” moment, proving
they would be willing to buy up documents that are challenging to their
history for the purpose of suppressing them and hiding them from the
white-hot light of public scrutiny.

It does need to be pointed out, Hofmann’s forgeries may have been a good
thing. I mean, there’s no way of completely reversing the damage he did
or even of knowing how many documents he forged throughout his 7 years
of active buying, selling or trading old documents. That is really
unfortunate, and it tends to lend credibility to the argument that some
of what you read online is nothing but anti-Mormon propaganda.

What I find so interesting about it is the fact that Hofmann eventually
was called out for manufacturing documents by people in relevant fields
that were studying his work in depth. He was obviously a master forger
to get away with it for so long, but he made a couple of slips that made
a scholar like Jerald Tanner question the work which began the landslide
to discovering Hofmann as a fraud.

Why I say it may have been a good thing is it caused us to question
Mormon history and the sources by which we understand that history.
Hofmann wasn’t creating these documents out of thin air, more often than
not, he was only creating a document that was known to exist at one
time, merely filling in the gap where the document existed.

Take, for example, the document that Hofmann offered to sweeten the deal
with the Salamander Letter. Hofmann claimed he had an 1825 contract
signed by Josiah Stowell and Joseph Smith Sr. saying they would evenly
split the proceeds of the treasure they were hunting for in
Pennsylvania. We know that this treasure hunt occurred from contemporary
sources, and we also know that Joseph Smith was essentially convicted as
“The Glass looker,” for playing a con on Josiah Stowell, convincing
Stowell to pay for the trip and fund the treasure digging for a few
weeks. We didn’t know if there was a signed contract between these men,
but we do know the treasure hunting trip *DID* happen.

In forging the contract, Hofmann wasn’t just making something up out of
thin air, he knew that a contract may have existed at one point, and
forged the contract that fit into the existing historical narrative. The
same can be said about the Salamander letter. Harris believed that
Joseph Smith had magical powers and could see anything he desired
through Joseph’s stone and hat parlor trick, that was how Martin Harris
and Joseph Smith really began their working dynamic. In E.D. Howe’s
book, we have a person with a signed affidavit saying that there was a
toad guardian in the hole, not a salamander, but a toad, and it struck
Joseph 3 times when he tried to pick up the plates. A letter like this
from Martin Harris to William Wines Phelps may have existed at one point
with the detail of White Salamander changed to toad, of course, but we
don’t have any reason to believe that a letter like that still exists
today. Point is, Hofmann didn’t just manufacture the Salamander letter
out of thin air, he forged something that may have existed at one point
and fit in the existing narrative of Mormon history that was already
well substantiated.

In my honest opinion, naked opinion you may call it, Hofmann doing what
he did has served to help the field of Mormon historical study in ways
we can’t properly quantify. He caused so many scholars and historians to
question from where they learned their Mormon history, and recheck the
trustworthiness and pedigree of existing documents. There may have been
a problem with Mormon historians trusting people too easily before
Hofmann came along and Hofmann merely exposed that weakness in the field
of Mormon studies. His work served to bolster the body of knowledge that
has been built up around Mormon scholarship and historical studies, not
tear it down.

This may sound odd, but I’m almost glad that Hofmann did what he did. It
seems that he initially set out on a mission to expose the fact that the
church suppresses information, whether they’re historical documents, or
how much money they’re paying for those documents, the church was acting
as a shady character in these deals, and Hofmann must have known they
would do it, or he wouldn’t have embarked on such a journey in the first
place. He was smart enough to pull underhanded tricks to drive up the
price by increasing public awareness and manufacturing a new commodity
system with values he arbitrarily chose based on public outcry, but I
think he had a noble goal in doing so, at least to start.

He did say in a later interview that he was in it for the money, and
I’ll try to find that exact quote for part II of this CC-Mark Hofmann
episode, but initially I think he was angry at the church in the same
way and for the same reasons that many believers are angry with the
church when they first learn about the real history.

I do think that Hofmann lacked a fair amount of empathy. When we look at
the post-trial interview he did and read his answers to some very harsh
questions, he seemed to lack any remorse for the people he killed or for
the remaining family members after the bombings. The people that
purchased the Salamander Letter, Steven Christensen and Gary Sheets,
become the targets of Hofmann in mid-October 1985, a year and a half
after the point we got to in this episode. As we heard in the interview
with Sandra that opened this episode, Hofmann killed two people with
mercury switch pipe bombs and one day later nearly killed himself when a
third bomb exploded in his own car.

We have a bit to cover in the next episode, so I hope you stick around
for part II of this CC examination of Mark Hofmann. He really is a
fascinating individual and this is history we’re talking about where the
vast majority of the people involved are still alive and active in
studying church history. This is important history that’s still in
living color in front of us today; it happened only 30 years ago. Mark
Hofmann is still in Utah State Pen in Draper, Utah right now.

As for our examination, Hofmann still has many deals to make and many
forgeries to manufacture before he dabbles into manufacturing bombs, so
be sure to catch next week’s episode to hear the conclusion of Hofmann’s
story.

END
