---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 26 - Joseph Smith, Broken or the Breaker?
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-26-joseph-smith-broken-breaker/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-26-joseph-smith-broken-or-the-breaker
category: History
date: 2016-01-21 18:10:34 PST
---

Ep 26 – Joseph Smith, Broken or the Breaker?

On this episode, we take on the time period from the hot Missouri summer
nights of 1831, all the way to the blooming beauty of an 1832 Ohio
spring. We introduce a few new characters that get their very own NaMo
nicknames, e.g. William Wines (Double-Dub) Phelps, John (Goebbels)
Whitmer, and Philo (Dibble-Dabble). We even get introduced to our first
contact with one of Joe's to-be plural wives, Marinda Nancy
Johnson-Hyde-Smith-Smith-Hyde. Hingepin Rigdon and Joe team up to
continue in their efforts to complete the "Inspired Translation" of the
Bible, and get a whole bunch of kooky new revelations as a side order.
The episode ends with the March 1832 beating/tarring/feathering, and a
special little surprise from Rigdon.

Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
  
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/

Links mentioned in the show:

Pope-Kahn letter exchange

https://ballandalus.wordpress.com/2015/06/01/mongol-papal-encounter-letter-exchange-between-pope-innocent-iv-and-guyuk-khan-in-1245-1246/

Philo Dibble-Dabble autobiography

http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/PDibble.html

Joseph Smith movie (minute 25 for tar and feather scene)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xVw6PsSinI

Guest Spots: 

Phil Furgeson Show Ep \#153

<http://www.spreaker.com/show/phil-fergusons-tracks>

Country Fried Freethought

<http://www.podcastchart.com/podcasts/country-fried-freethought-spreaker>

Welcome to episode 26 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, I'm Bryce
Blankenagel and thank you for joining me. 

Last historical timeline episode ended on a wee bit of a low note. We
discussed a bunch of new missions that Joe sent everybody on, and the
fact that Joe and Emma had their second and third child in one day who
both died a few hours after childbirth. Emma and Joe adopted Joseph S.,
and Julia Murdock, who were the twins of John Murdock, as if they were a
replacement for their twins that had just died. 

After this, Joe, Hingepin Sidney Rigdon, and four others went to Jackson
Co MO to meet up with the remaining small missionary force that was
residing in MO, including Ollie Cowdung Oliver Cowdery. According to the
History of the Church, many tears were shed at this reuniting of good
old friends, and I made the argument that the tears were shed not only
for the long awaited reunion, but also because of the unbelievable
tragedy that Joe had just been through losing his second and third
child.

Let's jump right into the meat of this episode because, like usual, we
have a lot to talk about. Our timeline currently sits in the fall of
1831. Let's see if we can finish 1831, and get into early 1832 on
today's episode. Before getting into the situations that happened, we
need to introduce a few new people to our historical analysis. We have
to introduce them now because they were baptized into the church in
1831, even if these people don't distinguish themselves with anything
special for a while, we still need to talk about them.

In June of 1831, Joe announced the high priesthood, not the Melchizedek
priesthood, just the high priesthood in general. This was the first time
it came up, and it wasn't talked about in reference to Ollie and Joe
getting the priesthood in the woods in 1829.

Beyond that, another big thing happened in June of 1831. Among other
things, William Wines Phelps, or William W. Phelps, or W. W. Phelps, or
as we'll come to know him Double Dub Phelps was baptized into the
church. This guy was a heavy hitter throughout the entire history of the
church, and followed Bloody Brigham out to Utah, and died there in 1872
at the age of 80.

Double Dub Phelps is known most for writing a selection of Mormon only
Hymns, one of which is "Praise to the Man", the most Joseph worshipy
song in the entire Mormon hymn book. He was also wrote "If you could Hie
to Kolob", a fairly bizarre Mormon Hymn about ascending and becoming
gods. But more importantly, for our timeline anyway, Double Dub was
responsible for printing the first Mormon publication in his own
printing press in Independence, MO, called the "Evening and Morning
Star".

In Double Dub's journey out to Missouri, he passed through Cincinatti,
Ohio, and purchased the equipment and type set that would be used to
print the Evening and Morning Star, as well as the Book of Commandments
in 1833. Luckily, Once Phelps got to Missouri with all the equipment
necessary to set up the printing press, Eddy Party-Boy Partridge had
already purchased a lot in Independence, that would house the building
that the printing press was set up in. We'll investigate the details of
this on our next historical timeline episode, but for now, we need to
talk about a couple of other new guys that deserve their own NaMo
nicknames.

We already talked a fair amount about D-Day David Whitmer, because he
was one of the three witnesses, and he had a big part in the Book of
Mormon coming to fruition. Well, his two brothers Peter Jr, and John,
have come up a few times in revelations and as ansullary characters to
our narrative. Well, it's finally time to properly introduce John
Whitmer, because he eventually became one of the most important people
in church history. 

Now, that's undoubtedly a tall claim. When it comes to reading about the
history of the Church, it's always worth noting where the information
came from. It may have come from an anti-Mormon newspaper article, or a
believing Mormon's journal entry, or some other less than reliable
source. Well, John Whitmer was appointed as the first official Church
Historian. According to his own biography, he was somewhat reluctant to
do it, but indeed, Joe came up with a revelation saying that he should
become Church Historian, and John fell right into line with God's
commandment. 

This is from the Book of Commandments 50:1 and it was given in March of
1831.

"Behold, it is expedient in me that my servant John should write and
keep a regular history, and assist you, my servant Joseph, in
transcribing all things which shall be given you."

That was the divine revelation given from Joe, to John, calling him as
the Church's first official historian. So, when we look at sources, it's
often times a crapchute. Sometimes you can get some good historical
facts from an extremely biased presentation, and sometimes the bias is
embedded so deeply within the presentation, that it's worth questioning
the validity of the entire thing. Well, John Whitmer became the church's
first real full-time historian, and that means we need to pay a lot of
attention to him, and what he wrote about the Church, and its leadership
in general. We can scarcely find a more biased reporting of history and
current events in the church than John Whitmer, so for that reason,
we'll be calling him John Goebbels Whitmer, or just John Goebbels. One
need only look a century into the future from 1831 to learn about John
Goebbels' namesake. And hey, even better than that, the Whitmer family
was German, and spoke with German accents, so the nickname fits even
better than I initially thought.

John Goebbels Whitmer, and Double Dub Phelps, were two people we really
needed to get caught up with. They had been introduced into the story
long before this, and now it's time they finally made their proper debut
onto our show with their very own NaMo nicknames. 

One more person that is worth briefly mentioning is Ezra Booth. He was
one of the first outspoken apostates of the church, and one of its
earliest motivated critics. Booth was brought into the church in May
1831, and was called into leadership as an Elder on June 3, 1831. He was
one of the missionaries out in MO, and he attended the meeting in Kaw,
MO that Joe held once Joe and Rigdon arrived. Ezra Booth didn't stick
around long, so he won't be getting his own NaMo nickname, but he is an
interesting fellow, and he's also credited with the first mention of
polygamy by Joseph Smith in 1831. We'll get to that soon, but for now,
let's pickup our timeline.

After Joe, Hingepin Rigdon, and Ollie, along with other Elders of the
church held their conference in Kaw, MO, a large portion of them made
their way back to Ohio. The church had been fully established in
Missouri, and Joe had seen the prospective land acquisitions the church
would be making once it moved out to MO. The mood around the church was
pretty good around this time, and things seemed to be going swimmingly.
If you read about their visit to Missouri in the History of the Church
vol 1:198, it seems almost euphoric about the situation, and it's
completely out of place given the paragraphs before and after this
description. Take this part for example:

"The season is mild and delightful nearly three quarters of the year,
and as the land of Zion, . . . it bids fair – when the curse is taken
from the land – to become one of the most blessed places on the globe.
The winters are milder than the Atlantic states of the same parallel of
latitude, and the weather is more agreeable; so that were the virtues of
the inhabitants only equal to the blessings of the Lord which He permits
to crown the industry of those inhabitants, there would be a measure of
the good things of life for the benefit of the Saints, full, pressed
down, and running over, even an hundred-fold."

So pleasantly optimistic, and yet inexplicable as to why it was
included. I can only imagine that John Goebbels Whitmer wanted to
stretch his new historian legs a little bit, and write about something
other than the insane ramblings that happened to fall out of Joe's
skull, so he wrote about how great Zion is. Let's get one more passage
to really get a proper hold on the mood:

"But all these impediments vanish when it is recollected what the
Prophets have said concerning Zion in the last days; how the glory of
Lebanon is to come upon her; the first tree, the pine tree, and the box
tree together, to beautify the place of His sanctuary, that He may make
the place of His feet glorious. . . When the splendor of the Lord is
brought to our consideration for the good of His people, the
calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanish, and we
exclaim, "Out of Zion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined." 

Those passages are completely apropos of nothing that was talked about
before or after them. It's almost like reading the main Josephus passage
that talks about Jesus, known as "Testimonium Flavianum". The paragraph
before is talking about how many Jews were part of a typical Roman
genocide, and then there are these 7 optimistic sentences seemingly
plopped in from nowhere, and afterwords it moves on to talk about other
problems the Jews were having in a very melancholy tone. That's almost
how this passage reads in the History of the Church. It seems so out of
place. 

We know that most, if not all of Testimonium Flavianum was not actually
written by Josephus, but was later added by Christians, most likely
Eusebius of Caesarea. I wonder if this passage in the History of the
Church was written by somebody else, other than who is chronicling the
other passages before and after those paragraphs. I'm not implying
anything sinister, or any underhanded authorship as in the case of
Testimonium Flavianum, I'm just curious if it jumps out to anybody else,
and if there is any reason it's included in here seemingly so out of
place.

Moving on from textual criticism, after their conference in Kaw, MO.,
Joe, Ollie, Rigdon, Double dub Phelps, and a bunch of others made their
way back to Kirtland, which took most of the month of August to cover.
They arrive on August 27, 1831, and immediately get busy.

What happened over the next few months can be summed up in a sentence.
"Joe is the financial planner of the church, and he needs shitloads of
money\!" Let's look at the next few revelations that came out of
Kirtland in August and September of 1831.

This is BOC 59:43-50

"But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above.
And now I give unto you further directions concerning this land. It is
wisdom in me, that my servant Martin should be an example unto the
church, in laying his moneys before the bishop of the church. And also,
this is a law unto every man that cometh unto this land, to receive an
inheritance; And he shall do with his moneys according as the law
directs. And it is wisdom also, that there should be lands purchased in
Independence, for the place of the storehouse; And also for the house of
the printing. And other directions, concerning my servant Martin, shall
be given him of the Spirit, that he may receive his inheritance as
seemeth him good. And let him repent of his sins, for he seeketh the
praise of the world."

I don't feel like it's terribly necessary to comment on that passage
very much. The church needed money, so Joe came up with a revelation
telling everybody that follows to give some money. He even used his
beaten down, wifeless, landless, jobless, and nearly moneyless ol' pal
NSSM as an example, telling him to give every last penny he has to the
church, and telling everybody how righteous Marty was, and how he would
be blessed as seemeth him good for his faith and willingness to give.

This petition for money must not have worked, because very soon after
this, we find another revelation telling people to give money to the
church again for the purpose of purchasing Zion. You would think that
the almighty god of the universe would have no need for land ownership
agreements, the God of the Old Testament sure didn't seem to mind much
when it came to land ownership.

This is BOC 64:25-32

"And now, behold this is the will of the Lord your God concerning his
saints, that they should assemble themselves together unto the land of
Zion, not in haste, lest there should be confusion, which bringeth
pestilence. Behold the land of Zion, I the Lord holdeth it in mine own
hands; Nevertheless, I the Lord rendereth unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's; Wherefore I the Lord willeth, that you should purchase the
lands, that you may have advantage of the world, that you may have claim
on the world, that they may not be stirred up unto anger; For satan
putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the shedding
of blood; Wherefore the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by
purchase, or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you. And
if by purchase behold you are blessed; And if by blood, as you are
forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be
scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few
shall stand to receive an inheritance."

The last time David Michael and I were talking he made a really good
point to me. You see, it may not be apparent from my lack of knowledge
on the Roman empire, or Alexander the Great, or the Huns, or plenty of
other historical figures, but I really enjoy military history quite a
lot. David and I get in discussions all the time about history nerd
stuff, and it's a lot of fun because I don't talk to many other history
nerds like David. 

Anyway, the point he made was that Joe was the right guy in the wrong
time. What he means by that is Joe seemed to give plenty of revelations
that could have been carried out in a very bloody manner, in a different
time. 

Of course, the post-enlightenment European settlers of the
19<sup>th</sup> century United States wouldn't allow a religious tyrant
to get too far out of control without answering violence for violence,
so Joe was stuck with weaksauce revelations like the one we just read.
If Joe were living in 1150 c.e., in Temujin Khan's time and place, who
knows, he may just have become the next great Kahn, or the next
Alexander the great if Joe were living in 338 b.c.e, Macedonia. Joe
could have been the next divinely inspired war tyrant, working under
direct revelation from God.

This may be a rabbit hole, or a tangent, but hang in there with me for a
second. I love the letter sent from Pope Innocent IV to Guyuk Kahn in
1245. It's this convoluted description of the Catholic faith, and
Christianity in general. The original letter was full of lots of God
speak, and typical confusing Christian gobbledy-gook, and by the end it
sounds almost like it is trying to call the Kahns to repentance, or
inviting them to embrace Christianity. Altogether, if the Pope would
have known who he was writing to, it very possibly would have been
worded quite differently, because by the end, it's basically a desperate
plea to stop killing Christians, and taking their lands. 

This letter marked the Pope trying to gain the fealty of Guyuk Kahn by
proxy of the Christian God. I find it interesting that most people see
their fortune as god inspired. The Pope thought that his amazing come to
Jesus letter would soften the heart of the almighty ruler and Christian
persecutor in the Eastern step, but the Kahn sends back a letter that
sums everything up so very well, and this will get me to the point I'm
trying to make. If you want to read the letter exchange between Pope
Innocent IV and Guyuk Kahn, there will be a link to the letters
translated to english in the show notes.

The Kahn replied to the Pope with a letter containing this as the last
few passages:

"Furthermore, you have sent the following message: “You have conquered
all the lands of the Hungarians and other Christians. This seems strange
to me. Tell me what was their crime” I have also not understood this
message of you the order rs. Chinggis Khan and the Great Khan Ögedey
have both transmittedof the Eternal God that all the world should be
subordinated to the Mongols to be taken note of. But they disregarded
God’s order to such an extent that those mentioned by you even held a
great council, and they behaved arrogantly in refusing, and they killed
our messengers and envoys. Thus the Eternal God Himself has killed and
exterminated the people in those countries. How could anybody, without
God’s order, merely from his own strength, kill and plunder? And when
you go on to say, “I am a Christian, I honor God.” How do you think you
know whom God will absolve and in whose favor He will exercise His
mercy? How do you think you know that you dare to express such an
opinion?

Through the power of God, all empires from the rising of the sun to its
setting have been given to us and we own them. How could anyone achieve
anything except by God’s order? Now, however, you must say with a
sincere heart: “We shall be obedient, we, too, make our strength
available. You personally, at the head of the Kings, you shall come, one
and all, to pay homage to me and to serve me. Then we shall take note of
your submission. If, however, you do not accept God’s order and act
against our command, we shall know that you are our enemies.

This is what we make known to you. If you act against it, how then can
we know what will happen? Only God knows."

You see, the Kahns had a much more intelligent and testable perspective
of god than the Christians did. They figured that God was with whoever
was the most successful, which is not entirely ridiculous when you think
about it. Guyuk told the Pope that the Kahns were obviously working with
the strength of God, for how could any nation do what the Mongols had
done by this point, without the help of God. That seems like a fairly
reasonable question, based on testable facts.

The Mongols had come out on top of amazing battles against
incomprehensible odds, with minimal casualties. From their perspective,
how could they not be doing Gods will? If God really is almighty, and he
didn't want the Mongols killing 40 million people, or conquering 12
million square miles, why did God let it happen. That's 11% of the
world's population, and 22% of it's landmass, all killed and conquered
by one empire. If God didn't want this empire to flourish, then why did
it happen? If the Christian God was the ruler of the universe, why did
he allow millions of Christians to fall to the swords of the greatly
superior human Mongols? 

Let's shift our focus from the Mongols. Think about it this way from an
Old Testament perspective, the only reason the Hebrews were able to
conquer so many cities (Midian, Ameleck, Canaan) was because of Moses'
divine mandate to do so. Yahweh was responsible for interfering on
behalf of the Israelite nomads for almost every battle they encountered.
I do have to point out that there is absolutely no evidence of any of
this happening, or of Moses even existing, but it's still worth pointing
out that OT God seems to side with whoever is winning in wartime. 

The only time we see this rule being violated is in the case of
Mormonism. If you're the god of the New New Testament, aka BoM, speaking
through Joseph Smith, then you conform nicely to the laws of the land in
early 19<sup>th</sup> century America. Isn't it weird how that works?
Isn't it odd how god tends to operate within the parameters of the
society that worships him?

My overall point is this, and this is the point that David made much
better than I am right now. Joe was the right guy, living in the wrong
time. He had the divine mandate from his own personal God concept, and
he eventually had the armies to raise some serious hell, but he just
didn't live in a time and place that was conducive to his behaving in a
way like Alexander, or the great Kahns did. Joe couldn't get away with
mass murder like these arguably great men had in the past. The time and
place Joe lived in restricted his ability to conquer land by any means
other than legal purchase.

This brings us to a larger point, given Joe's revelation we just read.
Not only were Joe's actions restricted by the time and place in which he
was living, but so was his own personal God. You see, most people act
within the confines that society dictates, and their god usually fits
very nicely into that hole. Anybody that doesn't have this harmonization
between god and reality is seen as a wackaloon, or an extremist to some
degree. Anybody who has a personal god belief that is outside the
dictates of the time and place they are living in, becomes a problem to
society in general. We can see that Joe's revelations, and by extension
his God, operated within the confines of his society, for now anyway.
Once the Nauvoo years come along, then Joe becomes the almighty worldly
ruler, and King of Israel, with very little regard for reality in any
way whatsoever.

That being said, I would make the argument that Joe, or somebody, was
coming up with these revelations out of his head, as opposed to being
divinely inspired. I know that's basically a forgone conclusion given
the stance I usually take on this show, but I still figured it was a
point worth hashing out, and giving some historical analogies for.

Getting back to the meat here, given this revelation for Joe to acquire
Zion through legal means, and LEGAL MEANS ONLY\!, Joe and the church
were obviously desperate for some sustainable income. He had people
giving when they could, but he hadn't set out an actual rule for it yet.
Joe had merely called certain people to purchase certain things, and
then extended the call to give, to anybody else in the congregation that
may have been paying attention. This was not sustainable, and
sustainability is what the Church of Christ needed the most at this
time. Fast forward to September of 1831 in the BoC 65:29-33

"For I the Lord requireth the hearts of the children of men. Behold now
it is called today, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for
the tithing of my people; For he that is tithed shall not be burned; for
after today cometh the burning; This is speaking in the manner of the
Lord; For verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly
shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of
hosts;"

That was the official installation of the law of tithing on the members
of Joe's church. For many obvious reasons, it was completely necessary
in order for the church to continue to grow. There was absolutely no way
for the church to survive without sustainable income. The LDS Church
could survive today if it's $7Bn per year in tithing dried up, but
that's only because of remarkable diversity of investments, and an huge
umbrella of separate companies that are for profit, and financially
solvent. I mean, an insurance agency with $3.5Bn in assets isn't going
anywhere anytime soon, nor is its mother company. But that's the church
today, that has a lot of really smart people working for it.

Joe's little church didn't have all these billions of dollars in assets
and investments. Joe's church didn't have 670,000 acres of cattle
ranches and orange farms in Florida like they do now. Joe's church was
completely insolvent until this steady stream of tithes started. Money
becomes a bit less of an issue to Joe, at least until the United Firm
comes along for a couple of years and then collapses. Until that time
comes, we have a brief hiatus of talking about the money part of Joe's
early Mormonism.

I know we've discussed Joe's begging for money a few times on the show,
but we can't put it to bed quite yet. I want to draw a circle around
this revelation before moving on. The revelations dealing with money
that we've talked about on this show, are a very small percentage of the
total revelations Joe gave that relate to, or deal with, money directly.
I've skipped over covering soooo many of them for fear of redundancy.
The BoC and D\&C are filled to the brim with revelations asking people
to give money to the church, or commanding them to purchase something
directly. There's simply no studying Mormon history without pointing out
the abundance of revelations regarding money. Risking that redundancy
one more time, I just want to point out when this revelation was given,
relative to others seemingly important revelations.

This revelation that put the law of tithing into place was a
considerably early revelation. I have to point out that it's the last
revelation included in the Book of Commandments before it was compiled,
but in the grand scheme of Mormon history, this was a really early
revelation. The law of tithing was instated 1 year into Joe's 14 year
reign, and before a lot of relevant things in the church. It came along
way before the temple ceremonies, baptisms for the dead, the Aaronic or
Melchizedek priesthoods, the Word of Wisdom, the doctrine on Kolob, the
basis of leadership roles in the church, polygamy, the quorum of the
twelve, the secret passwords and handshakes, magic underwear, doctrine
on tatoos and piercings, current first vision account, high priests,
before blacks couldn't explicitly have the priesthood, before all of
this. Why is this? Was money the most prominent issue on God's mind?

If you think about it, it's understandable from a naturalistic
perspective, right? If Joe was setting up his religion for people to
follow, there is no possible way to run it without some source of steady
income, so he needed to set up that portion fairly early on. The problem
comes when we consider the roots of the church, foregoing the
naturalistic perspective of it's foundation.

The church claims that it's the product of the one true church being
restored to the earth. They claim that Jesus set up the one true church
while he was here, and it was lost during the medieval age, which is why
it's called the dark ages. Joe merely restored Jesus' one true church to
the earth, starting with the Book of Mormon. From this perspective, I
find it hard to believe that tithing was the most pressing thing that
God wanted people to know about once his church was finally restored to
the earth, especially given the problems that money creates in churches.
Most of the early divisions and disagreements in the church were over
nothing more than money. A disagreement about money and priestcrafting
is what drove a wedge in between childhood friends, and cousins Joe and
Ollie. Why was it so pertinent for God to restore that one doctrine, so
early in the formation of Joe's church?

Well, hashing out God's reasoning here is a matter of positing a
naturalistic, versus divine origin for the church. Which side makes the
most amount of sense, and explains the evidence best? Did God really
want people to give tithing before they put on their magic underwear,
and did all the other things I listed a second ago? Or, did Joe just
need money for his early church, and came up with these revelations
first to answer that need? You decide.

Alright, now that the money part of Joe's early church is out of the way
for a minute, we can talk about some of the other important things that
happened in 1831.

The thing that marks the biggest transition involving Joe was his move
out to Hiram, Ohio. On September 12, 1831, the day after the tithing
revelation was given, Joe moved to Hiram, Ohio, to live with John
Johnson for a short time. He took his young family with him. At this
time, Joe and Emma had little Joseph and Julia Murdock, the twins they
had adopted. They wouldn't be having another child for a little while
after this.

Next, something very interesting happens. But before we talk about it,
we need to talk about Joe and his insatiable libido. If we recall back
to some of the earliest episodes of this show, Joe was accused of being
flirty, or maybe even fooling around with Emma's best friend, Eliza
Winters. This happened a couple of weeks after Joe and Emma were
married, and may have been the driving factor behind Joe and Emma moving
from Harmony, PA., to Fayette, N.Y. If this wasn't a red flag to Emma,
it should have been, and she only had herself to blame for not paying
attention or acting on it. 

The next instance we have of Joe acting a little frisky is in the 1830
trials in South Bainbridge, and Colesville. If we recall back to Episode
21, we found the court records of those trials, and there was a very
interesting detail buried therein. The court was held in recess until
the two daughters of Bossman Josiah Stowell, named Miriam and Rhoda,
could be called onto the stand, to testify against Joe on adultery
charges. The court really was just trying to charge Joe with anything
that would stick at this point. Well, it didn't stick, and Joe was
released on the disorderly person charges, as well as the adultery
charges.

In July of 1831, when Joe and company were in Jackson County, MO, he
gave a revelation that is considered to be the first signal of polygamy.
We only really know about this revelation because Ezra Booth brought it
into the white hot light of scrutiny when he apostatized. I believe we
covered this in a recent episode, so I'll just go over the highlights of
the revelation really quickly here.

This revelation was given in July of 1831, but they didn't have pen or
paper in Kaw, MO. It was later recounted by our new friend William Wines
Double Dub Phelps.

Part — of a revelation by Joseph Smith Jun. given over the boundary,
west of Jackson Co. Missouri, on Sunday morning, July 17, 1831, when
Seven Elders, viz: Joseph Smith Jun. Oliver Cowdery, W.W. Phelps, Martin
Harris, Joseph Coe, Ziba Peterson and Joshua Lewis united their hearts
in prayer, in a private place, to inquire of the Lord who should preach
the first sermon to the remnants of the Lamanites and Nephites, and the
people of that Section, that should assemble that day in the Indian
country, to hear the gospel, and the revelations according to the Book
of Mormon.

    Among the company, there being neither pen, ink or paper, Joseph
\[Smith, Jr.\] remarked that the Lord could preserve his words as he had
ever done, till the time appointed, and proceeded:

    Verily I say unto you that the wisdom of man in his fallen state,
knoweth not the purposes and the privileges of my holy priesthood. but
ye shall know when ye receive a fulness by reason of the anointing: For
it is my will, that in time, ye should take unto you wives of the
Lamanites and Nephites, that their posterity may become white,
delightsome and Just, for even now their females are more virtuous than
the gentiles.

    Reported by W.W.P. \[William W. Phelps\]

    About three years after this was given, I asked brother Joseph
\[Smith, Jr.\] privately, how "we," that were mentioned in the
revelation could take wives from the "natives"—as we were all married
men? He replied instantly "In th\[e\] same manner that Abraham took
Hagar and Katurah \[Keturah\]; and Jacob took Rachel Bilhah and Zilpah:
by revelation—the saints of the Lord are always directed by
revelation."[10](http://www.utlm.org/onlineresources/indianpolygamyrevelation.htm#10)

This was the earliest account we have of Joe trying to start up
polygamy, and it was supposedly given mere months before Joe and Rigdon
moved out to Hiram, Ohio. Let's just take a second to appreciate it.
This was arguably the best idea that anybody had to start integrating
with the Natives. 

Until this point, most people had been trying to force the Native
Americans into slavery, or proselyte Protestant Christianity to them,
and when those didn't work like hoped, the early American government
just pushed them out into increasingly smaller reservations. Once the
reservations idea wasn't quite good enough, and the Americans wanted to
expand further, they just killed the Natives. Hundreds of thousands of
Lamanites fell by cannon, gunshot, disease, illness, or malnutrition,
and the ones that didn't die, were irrevocably relegated to
reservations, most of which were just chunks of land that nobody wanted,
so the government gave them to the Natives.

Now, I'm not one for advocating patriarchal polygyny, especially when
it's so rife with abuse and misogyny like Mormon polygamy was, but
wouldn't that have been a better solution than killing all the Natives?
Us humans have a weird tendency to put up imaginary barriers between
different looking humans, and fight to the death to maintain those
barriers. If we just intermingle, and try our hardest NOT to kill each
other, it seems like everybody would be better off. I think Joe was on
to something here. He just wanted to marry a bunch of really hot Native
Americans, but I think he was right, even if it was for the wrong
reasons in this case.

If we could rewind the clock 400 years and *not* kill almost all the
Natives, imagine how enriched American culture really would be today.
It's hard to make a cogent argument against how great that would have
been, if only we didn't have their deaths as the unnecessary byproduct
of an "us vs them" mentality. Joe kind of had the right idea. That's
just my personal perspective on the situation, let's get back to the
topic.

Joseph issued this polygamy revelation in mid 1831, and then by
September, he had moved to Hiram, Ohio to live with the Johnson family
on their 300 acre farm. Since then, the church has purchased the farm
and refurbished the home, and it's currently a tourist attraction in
Hiram, Ohio.

Now we need to introduce some other people into the mix. Joseph didn't
just show up on some random guy's doorstep and ask to live with him,
that's absurd. The Johnson family had acquired a Book of Mormon in the
winter of 1830, possibly early 1831, we're unsure. Once Joe rolled into
town, never to look back to New York, John and Mary Elsa Johnson took
their family the 30 miles North to Kirtland to see what the fuss was
about. John and Elsa, as well as Lyman Johnson, who was John and Elsa's
son, converted and were baptized in February of 1831. Lyman's brother
Luke Johnson was baptized soon afterwards on May 10, 1831. 

While the Johnson family is very important to Mormon history, John, and
Elsa don't play a very big role themselves. They were merely the older
couple that housed Joe and Rigdon during an important time in church
history. The family members we need to focus on are John and Elsa's
sons, Lyman, and Luke Johnson. These boys have a very sordid past with
the church, and there were even rumors that the Danites killed Lyman in
1859, some time after his excommunication. But that's all details to
hash out on another episode. For the purposes of today's episode, let's
talk about what happened in the Johnson home. 

First off, we need to discuss the occurence that made the Johnson's, and
a few others, believe that Joe was a real prophet. I'm going to take
this directly from the History of the Church vols 1:215-216. The story
is recounted in the footnotes, yet bore only a brief mention from Joseph
himself in his own dictated history. It's originally recounted in a
Campbellite work titled "Hayden's History of the Disciples" page 250,
but I'm reading it out of the History of the church. You would think if
this were such a miraculous occurence, that Joe would have talked about
it at least briefly, but he didn't. To fill this void, it is necessary
to dive into outside sources, and put them in the footnotes of the
History of the Church.

"Mrs. Johnson had been afflicted for some time with a lame arm, and was
not at the time of the visit able to lift her hand to her head. The
party visited Smith partly out of curiosity, and partly to see for
themselves what there might be in the new doctrine. During the interview
the conversation turned on the subject of supernatural gifts, such as
were conferred in the days of the apostles. Someone said, "Here is Mrs.
Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to man now on the earth
to cure her?" A few moments later, when the conversation had turned in
another direction, Smith rose, and walking across the room, taking Mrs.
Johnson by the hand, said in the most solemn and impressive manner;
"Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I command thee to be
whole," and immediately left the room. The company were awe-stricken at
the infinite presumption of the man, and the calm assurance with which
he spoke."

It goes on to say that Mrs. Johnson returned to work the next day
without any trouble or pain. This signifies one of the earliest miracles
that Joseph supposedly performed, yet he didn't seem to recall it when
he was dictating his own history. I personally find it odd that we had
to go to a non-Mormon source to find the story of Joe's healing powers
that convinced a lot of people in Hiram, Ohio to join the church.

Regardless of where we find this miraculous healing scenario, this was
the one main thing that convinced the Johnson family that Joe was a real
prophet, thus spurring them to join the church. Well, the whole family
joined. We had John and Elsa Johnson, and their children were Lyman,
Luke, John jr., Olmsted, Eli, Edward and finally Marinda Nancy. I'm
having trouble finding any more offspring of John and Elsa. They may
have had more children, but without diving into hours of research to
find them, these are the important names that we need to keep in mind
for our timeline.

Once Joe had moved to Kirtland in early 1831, he began mustering up
quite a stir. One of the people that he had a dramatic impact on was
named Philo Dibble. I'm going to read an excerpt from Philo's
autobiography that describes the series of events that we're currently
discussing. 

"When Joseph came to Kirtland his fame spread far and wide. There was a
woman living in the town of Hiram, forty miles from Kirtland, who had a
crooked arm, which she had not been able to use for a long period. She
persuaded her husband, whose name was \[John\] Johnson, to take her to
Kirtland to get her arm healed.

I saw them as they passed my house on their way. She \[Elsa Johnson\]
went to Joseph and requested him to heal her. Joseph asked her if she
believed the Lord was able to make him an instrument in healing her arm.
She said she believed the Lord was able to heal her arm.

Joseph put her off till the next morning, when he met her at Brother
\[Newel K.\] Whitney's house. There were eight persons present, one a
Methodist preacher, and one a doctor. Joseph took her \[Elsa Johnson\]
by the hand, prayed in silence a moment, pronounced her arm whole, in
the name of Jesus Christ, and turned and left the room.

The preacher asked her if her arm was whole, and she straightened it out
and replied: "It is as good as the other." The question was then asked
if it would remain whole. Joseph hearing this, answered and said: 'It is
as good as the other, and as liable to accident as the other.'

The doctor who witnessed this miracle came to my house the next morning
and related the circumstance to me. He attempted to account for it by
his false philosophy, saying that Joseph took her by the hand, and
seemed to be in prayer, and pronounced her arm whole in the name of
Jesus Christ, which excited her and started perspiration, and that
relaxed the cords of her arm. I subsequently rented my farm and devoted
all my time to the interest of the Church, holding myself in readiness
to take Joseph wherever he wished to go."

Here we have Philo's reaction to this miraculous incident, and it was
the second, first hand account we have of the arm healing occurence,
which means it's fairly reliable as a historical occurence. Of course,
on a personal level, I don't think Joe did anything different from what
Peter Popoff used to do with his mega-church ministry, and continues to
do with blessed mineral water on late night ads. Popoff is only one of
countless other faith healers that have caught public attention and made
millions from it. People have been performing these spiritual healings
for millenia, and the results are nothing but a mixed bag of ritualism,
placebo effect, chemical reactions happening in the brain, all ruled by
confirmation bias. That seems to be the one recurring theme behind these
healings, prior belief. Joe even asked Elsa the day before if she
believed he could heal her arm. Then Joe took her arm in his hand, and
commanded it to be healed in the name of Jesus Christ, playing even
further into Elsa and Joe's confirmation bias, and then Elsa thought she
was healed, or didn't experience pain for a while, or something to that
effect. This convinced a lot of people that Joe was indeed a prophet,
and Philo even says he "subsequently rented my farm and devoted all my
time to the interest of the Church". What more could Joe want than more
loyal servants willing to give time, money, and resources to his church.
Joe looks more and more like Popoff the more I study him.

I also love how there's also a doubting Thomas in the crowd that watched
Joe perform the miracle. According to Philo, he spoke with the doctor
that was present during the miracle, and he was understandably
perplexed, much like modern doctors are when somebody claims to be
healed by divine intervention. Faith healing is undoubtedly an odd
phenomenon that educated people are studying quite a bit. Some doctors
try to incorporate that aspect into a regimented medical procedure for a
"whole body wellness" or something like that which I think is great, but
it doesn't really directly help in the study of faith healing. But, it
is something that we're working on. The simple fact that Joe put his
hands on an old lady, and told her that her arm is healed, doesn't
necessarily mean that it was healed, it just means she didn't feel pain
in it for a while. There was never a followup with dear old Elsa to see
if it was healed in the long term.

That was a terrible way to explain, and try to skepticize faith healing,
but for the purposes of what this show is, that'll be plenty to satisfy
my own skepticism and understanding of it. Let's move on to the rest of
Philo Dibble's quote, and let him carry the storyline into late 1831.

"On invitation of Father \[John\] Johnson, of Hiram, Joseph removed his
family to his home, to translate the New Testament. This was in the year
1831.

At this time Sidney Rigdon was left to preside at Kirtland and
frequently preached to us. Upon one occasion he said the keys of the
kingdom were taken from us. On hearing this, many of his hearers wept,
and when some one undertook to dismiss the meeting by prayer he said
praying would do them no good, and the meeting broke up in confusion."

Once Joe left Kirtland to live in the Johnson home 30 miles South of
Kirtland in Hiram, Ohio, Hingepin Rigdon was left to his own devices,
and began preaching contrary to Joe's teachings. This period in Mormon
history is losely referred to as "Rigdon's depression". Rigdon preached
in Kirtland that the keys were lost. For any never-mos out there, this
is a big deal. It's taught that every man gets the priesthood, but he's
given different keys to the kingdom based on his calling in the church.
Rigdon preaching that the "Keys had been taken", implied that Joe wasn't
a true prophet anymore. This was the biggest insurrection in Mormon
history up to this point.

Before now we had little schisms like the Hubble woman that claimed to
be a prophetess, or Wycam Clark and Northrop Sweet breaking off to start
the "Pure Church of Christ", but all of those schisms were minor and
were just members that felt wronged by the church or Joe in some way.
This was the biggest problem that Joe was to face, and it was against
his own friend, and co-founder of Mormonism Sidney Rigdon. Let's find
out how Joe dealt with the problem, compliments of Philo Dibble-Dabble.

"Brother Hyrum \[Smith\] came to my house the next morning and told me
all about it, and said it was false, and that the keys of the kingdom
were still with us. He wanted my carriage and horses to go to the town
of Hiram and bring Joseph. The word went abroad among the people
immediately that Sidney \[Rigdon\] was going to expose "Mormonism."

Joseph came up to Kirtland a few days afterwards and held a meeting in a
large barn. Nearly all the inhabitants of Kirtland turned out to hear
him. The barn was filled with people, and others, unable to get inside,
stood around the door as far as they could hear.

Joseph arose in our midst and spoke in mighty power, saying: "I can
contend with wicked men and devils--yes with angels. No power can pluck
those keys from me, except the power that gave them to me; that was
Peter, James and John. But for what Sidney \[Rigdon\] has done, the
devil shall handle him as one man handles another." 

Alright, let that sink in for a minute. Rigdon preached something that
was contrary to what Joe was preaching. This was really nothing new to
Joe, he had been dealing with insurrection like this for a while, but
not from his second in command, Hingepin Rigdon. Upon hearing Rigdon had
said such horrible things, Hyrum Smith, Joe's older brother, borrowed
Philo's horses and carriage to pick up Joe from Hiram, Ohio, and bring
him up to Kirtland to put out this new fire that had just ignited. Joe
gathered a barn full of people and told them that Rigdon was inspired by
the devil to say such blasphemies. Joe finished it off saying that
Rigdon would come in to some unfortunate circumstance very soon. Let's
find out what happened from Philo. He tells us about a woman telling
Rigdon what Joe had said, but I can't find any reference to this
anywhere other than Philo's recounting here, whereas the rest of this
story is attested multiple times. After telling us what the woman said
to Rigdon, something very important happens, and we'll pick up there.

"Thomas B. Marsh's wife went from the meeting and told Sidney \[Rigdon\]
what Joseph had said, and he replied: "Is it possible that I have been
so deceived? But if Joseph says so, it is so."

This is the quote I couldn't find anywhere but here. I don't know if
Rigdon said that, or if Marsh's wife even went to see Rigdon, but we do
know for a fact that what Philo recounts next really did happen.

"About three weeks after this, Sidney \[Rigdon\] was lying on his bed
alone. An unseen power lifted him from his bed, threw him across the
room, and tossed him from one side of the room to the other. The noise
being heard in the adjoining room, his family went in to see what was
the matter, and found him going from one side of the room to the other,
from the effects of which Sidney was laid up for five or six weeks. Thus
was Joseph's prediction in regard to him verified."

Alright, I'm not sure how to take this exactly, but I have an idea in my
mind of how it all went down. You can feel free to come to your own
understanding of the circumstances, but I'll give you my synopsis as I
understand it. For starters, I think Joe kicked the living shit out of
Rigdon. I really do believe that. Joe was a scrapper, which we'll
discuss later in this episode, but his entire growing up life up to this
point, he had been in various fights, much like every other kid did
growing up in that time. The thing is, Joe was tough, and damn good at
fighting and standing his ground.

We should also remember that Joe had a knack for predicting harm coming
upon people a little while before said harm happened. Take Lilburn Boggs
for example. This guy signed the Mormon extermination order, and Joe
said that harm would befall him. A little while later, we can't account
for Orrin Pistol-Packin Porter Rockwell's whereabouts, and amazingly
Boggs was shot with a shotgun. Joe seemed quite prophetic in both of
these claims, and his prophecies did NOT disappoint in either
circumstance.

So, forgive me if this seems like anti-mormon propoganda, or it seems
like it's unfounded in some way, but I think it's reasonable to assume
that Joe pretty much beat the hell out of Rigdon, which layed him up for
more than a month after that. 

Let's take into account the circumstances that may have caused Rigdon to
be displeased with Joe, and motivated him to say such horrible things
about the modern-day prophet. Joe had rolled into town, took over
Rigdon's congregations, demanded money, and then went to Jackson County
and preached to the Natives, claiming that the leaders of the church
should take them as wives to lighten up their skin. After that, Joe came
back to Kirtland, and asked more people for more money. Then he instated
the law of tithing to ensure he would always have a steady stream of
income. In doing this, Joe was exploiting all the work Rigdon had done
in bringing together the congregations in Mentor and Kirtland. Joe had
been claiming Rigdon's ideas and revelations as his own for a very long
time, and now that Rigdon and Joe were working on the inspired
translation of the Bible, Rigdon may have wanted more credit. Maybe
Rigdon wanted to take his church back from the ravenous clutches of his
frienemy Joe. Arguably, Rigdon was merely contending with the monster
he'd created, so maybe he didn't want to sleep in the bed he made.

Maybe this is why Rigdon was depressed during this time. He didn't like
the direction the church was going, and wanted to bring it back to what
he'd spent so much time and energy building. As soon as Joe was gone for
a little while, Rigdon tried to convince some people that Joe wasn't the
one true prophet, and Joe took care of the problem in a way he was very
familiar with.  
I know I made a few jumps in the historical narrative there, but I hit
on a lot of very important points that may have spawned contention
between Rigdon and Joe, and all these pressures could have served as the
impetuss for Rigdon's insurrection. But, I must be clear, that summary
was speculation trying to find a naturalistic perspective for how Rigdon
suffered such a horrible physical beating. I think it makes sense, and
that's my perspective, but I suppose that it could have been God on
Joe's side, and the Devil on Rigdon's side, so God beat the fuck out of
Rigdon to teach him that following the Devil is a bad..... You figure it
out, which perspective makes the most sense?

Let's talk about Philo for a second before we discuss Rigdon moving to
Hiram, Ohio where Joe was living with the Johnsons. Philo joined the
church in either October or November 1830, baptized by P-cubed Parley P.
Pratt during the first westward mission of the church. This was the same
mission that Hingepin Rigdon supposedly was converted during. Philo was
a land dealer, or as we might call him today, a real estate agent. This
man definitely wasn't hurting for money before Joe came along. 

When Joe moved to Kirtland, he lived for a very short time on the farm
of Frederick G. Williams, or as we know him Freddy Willey. Joe lived
there for possibly a week, but found out the farm was $400 in debt, and
Freddy Willey was about to lose it. After a few things transpired to try
and save it, Philo ended up selling 1200 acres of his own land at $1.25,
and paid Freddy Willey's debt.

Philo Dibble was quite clearly a great guy, and he stayed with the
church until his death in Springville, Utah in 1895. His autobiography
is known in church history as "Early Scenes in Church History,"
subtitled "Four Faith Promoting Classics". Apologists and Mormon
historians like to dabble into his autobiography from time to time, like
to tell the story about Elsa's arm being healed by Joseph. This guy was
just a genuinely nice guy meaning we can't give him a mean nickname like
Not-So-Smarty-Marty's or something. For the purposes of our examination
and giving all important characters a proper NaMo nickname, we'll go
with Philo Dibble-Dabble from now on, primarily just because it's fun to
say.

Let's get back to the timeline here. Seemingly we had Hingepin Rigdon
trying to strip Joe of his leadership claims, effectively taking the
wind out of Joe's prophet sails (you can spell that profit either way
there). Rigdon got some sense knocked into him, and then him and Joe
reconcile their differences and head out to Amherst, Ohio, where there
would be a general conference. With the number of missions that were
active, in lots of places throughout New York, Ohio, Missouri, and
touching some other states, there were occasionally members in some of
these outerlying towns that had big enough homes to hold a conference
in.

When we think about conferences that the church holds today, it's
nothing like these conferences that Joe and Rigdon were holding in
various places. Church conference today is held in a 21,000 seat
cathedral, a vastly different version of confernece than in 1832. Most
of the time the conferences back then were just a couple of families
gathered together in a living room to hear what the prophet had to say.
So in February of 1832, a family in Amherst, Ohio held a conference. 

Soon after this conference, Joe and Rigdon were preaching in Ravena,
Ohio, a mere hop-skip-and-a-jump from Amherst and Kirtland. After this,
Joe and Hingepin make their way back to Hiram, Ohio. They both go crazy
on the inspired translation of the Bible for a few weeks. They were
either translating John, or Revelation at this time, I'm not completely
sure, but they were cranking away.

But that's not all, because something else that comes out of Hiram, Ohio
during this time are an assload of new revelations. When Joe and
Hingepin Rigdon got together without much outside stimulations or
distractions, they really busted out a lot of revelations. One of these
revelations told Joe and Double Dub Phelps to compile all the existing
revelations into one book, and call it the "Book of Commandments". We'll
call this edition of the official church revelations, the Joe years. 

Everything in the Book of Commandments up to this point had been a
fairly clinical take on the new religion. Most of the revelations were
fairly pragmatic at this time. Almost every one of them claims that Joe
is indeed the one true prophet of God, and that certain people should go
on missions and whatnot. Of course one of the main unique revelations
that came about during this time was the current D\&C 20. This tells
about all kinds of important leadership things that were needed to
establish a pecking order. Interestingly enough, this revelation was
actually given by Ollie Cowdung Oliver Cowdery. That means that the more
mundane and repetitive revelations were given by Joe, and one of the
main revelations used in organization of the Church, was actually given
by Joe's second in command at the time, Ollie. Isn't that fascinating?
You see how the Cowdung can just pop in and pop out like that without
anybody expecting him. It happens throughout a lot of revelations, and
even some of the Book of Mormon.

This same phenomenon of Joe not being the creative one, shone brightly
once Him and Hingepin spent a lot of time in the same house together.
The main revelation that is so paramount that came out of this time is
the current D\&C 76. Most believing members will know that section 76
holds a lot of revelations that set Mormonism apart as the weird ones.
If you want to learn all about crazy Mormon heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars,
hell, and all, D\&C 76 is where you need to look. It's one of the
longest revelations, and was obviously given in multiple sittings, which
is made apparent by the writing style. Given how it's written, it seems
that the revelation was written in smaller sections, and then pieced
together later on. 

It is worth noting that it required Rigdon and Joe to be away from the
sense of the real world, in order for some of these more unique and
certifiably crack-ass revelations to come out of Joe's deranged skull...
or was it Rigdons deranged skull? Hang in until the end of this episode
for a fun little treat that I recently stumbled upon. I'll leave it up
to you to decide if these revelations came from half-assed Joe himself,
or puppet-master house of crazy-pants Hingepin Rigdon.

The next thing we need to talk about is Joe's education. That may seem
like a weird place to go given everything we talked about, but it's
necessary. You see, Joe received an education similar to what most
people got in his day. He attended a few years here and there, maybe had
a fifth grade education at best, so his education was a bit different
than what we consider an education today.

This may seem like a tired phrase, but clearly Joe went to the school of
hard knocks. He was smart enough to always be learning from people, but
it occasionally came at a cost. Joe was a hell of a scrapper, alpha-male
type, because he was so educated in fighting his siblings, friends, and
foes alike. Most young men were just like this in his day, our
upbringing today is much different than what Joe and company experienced
in their formative years. 

Well, Joe was about to get a proper lecture in the school of
hard-knocks, and we're going to use historical empathy to put ourselves
in Joe's shoes. We're going to read his own lecture notes very soon,
right from the History of the Church. It's rather fascinating to see it
dictated from Joe's perspective, and it really helps us to get into his
shoes, and see it through his eyes when it was happening. 

But before reading that, we need to understand the context a little
better. We know that Joe dealt with a fair amount of persecution on many
different levels. He went to court a few times for being a "disorderly
person," which can mean a great number of things, but generally meant
that people didn't like what he was doing when it came to business
practices, or as an impartial observer might term it, constantly fucking
various people out of small amounts of money. But, Joe didn't stop at
money,

In one instance, it almost seemed like people were angry at Joe for
getting a little hanky panky with Bossman Josiah Stowells daughters.
They were so pissed off about what Joe was doing, and just who he was in
general, they were trying to catch him with any legal technicality that
would stick. But, Joes disorderly person, and adultery charges weren't
proven in court, so nothing must have happened, and Joe must have been a
stand-up guy.

Earlier we talked about Joe's insatiable libido, and how much it got him
in trouble. I mean, shit, it's what he died for. He blew up the printing
press in Nauvoo because he didn't want people to know about how much
pipe he was laying. Well, the argument can be made that he was about to
learn another lesson from the school of hard-knocks, as consequenced by
his all-to-frequent bumpin uglies.

Remember when I said that the whole Johnson family converted after Joe
healed mother Elsa's arm? Pay attention to the Johnsons in the story
we're about to read from the History of the Church, as dictated by
Joseph Smith.

This is starting on page 261 of vol 1 of History of the Church, and it
starts with talking about some recent apostates, as well as Joe and
Emma's adopted twins, Joseph S., and Julia Murdock Smith. Just a heads
up, it is censored, but I'm going to fill in those blanks myself, for
entertainment purposes only.

"In addition to the apostate Ezra Booth, Simonds Ryder, Eli Johnson,
Edward Johnson and John Johnson, Jun., had apostatized. 

On the 24th of March, the twins before mentioned, which had been sick of
the measles for some time, caused us to be broken of our rest in taking
care of them, especially my wife. In the evening I told her she had
better retire to rest with one of the children, and I would watch with
the sicker child. In the night she told me I had better lie down on the
trundle bed, and I did so, and was soon after awakened by her screaming
murder, when I found myself going out of the door, in the hands of about
a dozen men; some of whose hands were in my hair, and some had hold of
my shirt, drawers and limbs. The foot of the trundle bed was towards the
door, leaving only room enough for the door to swing open. My wife heard
a gentle tapping on the windows which she then took no particular notice
of (but which was unquestionably designed for ascertaining whether or
not we were all asleep) , and soon after the mob burst open the door and
surrounded the bed in an instant, and, as I said, the first I knew I was
going out of the door in the hands of an infuriated mob. I made a
desperate struggle, as I was forced out, to extricate myself, but only
cleared one leg, with which I made a pass at one man, and he fell on the
door steps. I was immediately overpowered again; and they swore by G--
--, they would kill me if I did not be still, which quieted me. As they
passed around the house with me, the fellow that I kicked came to me and
thrust his hand, all covered with blood, into my face and with an
exulting hoarse laugh, muttered "Ge, gee, G-- d-- ye, I'll fix ye." They
then seized me by the throat and held on till I lost my breath. After I
came to, as they passed along with me about thirty rods from the house I
saw Elder Rigdon stretched out on the ground, whither they had dragged
him by his heels. I supposed he was dead. I began to plead with them,
saying, "You will have mercy and spare my life, I hope." To which they
replied, "G--d--ye, call on yer God for help, we'll show ye no mercy;"
and the people began to show themselves in every direction; one coming
from the orchard had a plank; and I expected they would kill me, and
carry me off on the plank. They then turned to the right, and went on
about thirty rods further; about sixty rods from the house, and thirty
from where I saw Elder Rigdon, into the meadow, where they stopped, and
one said, "Simonds, Simonds," (meaning, I supposed, Simonds Ryder,)
"pull up his drawers, pull up his drawers, he will take cold." Another
replied: "Ain't ye going to kill 'im? ain't ye going to kill 'im?" when
a group of mobbers collected a little way off, and said: "Simonds,
Simonds, come here;" and "Simonds" charged those who had hold of me to
keep me from touching the ground (as they had done all the time), lest I
should get a spring upon them. They held a council, and as I could
occasionally overhear a word, I supposed it was to know whether or not
it was best to kill me. They returned after a while, when I learned that
they had concluded not to kill me, but to beat and scratch me well, tear
off my shirt and drawers, and leave me naked. One cried, "Simonds,
Simonds, where's the tar bucket?" "I don't know," answered one, "where
'tis, Eli's left it. They ran back and fetched the bucket of tar, when
one exclaimed, with an oath, "Let us tar up his mouth," and they tried
to force the tar-paddle into my mouth; I twisted my head around, so that
they could not; and they cried out, "G--d--ye, hold up yer head and let
us give ye some tar." They then tried to force a vial into my mouth, and
broke it in my teeth. All my clothes were torn off me except my shirt
collar; and one man fell on me and scratched my body with his nails like
a mad cat, and then muttered out: "G-- d---ye, that's the way the Holy
Ghost falls on folks\!" They then left me, and I attempted to rise, but
fell again; I pulled the tar away from my lips, so that I could breathe
more freely, and after up\[that\], whereupon I saw two lights. I made my
way towards one of them, and found it was Father Johnson's. When I came
to the door I was naked, and the tar made me look as if I were covered
with blood, and when my wife saw me she thought I was all crushed to
pieces, and fainted. During the affray abroad, the sisters of the
neighborhood had collected at my room. I called for a blanket, they
threw me one and shut the door; I wrapped it around me and went in. In
the meantime, Brother John Poorman heard an outcry across the corn
field, and running that way met father Johnson, who had been fastened in
his house at the commencement of the assault, by having his door barred
by the mob, but on calling to his wife to bring his gun, saying he would
blow a hole through the door, the mob fled, and Father Johnson, seizing
a club, ran after the party that had Elder Rigdon, and knocked down one
man, and raised his club to level another, exclaiming, "What are you
doing here?" when they left Elder Rigdon and turned upon Father Johnson,
who, turning to run toward his own house, met Brother Poorman coming out
of the corn field; each supposing the other to be a mobber, an encounter
ensued, and Poorman gave Johnson a severe blow on the left shoulder with
a stick or stone, which brought him to the ground. Poorman ran
immediately towards Father Johnson's, and arriving while I was waiting
for the blanket, exclaimed, "I'm afraid I've killed him." Killed who?
asked one; when Poorman hastily related the circumstances of the
rencounter near the corn field, and went into the shed and hid himself.
Father Johnson soon recovered so as to come to the house, when the whole
mystery was quickly solved concerning the difficulty between him and
Poorman, who, on learning the facts, joyfully came from his hiding
place. My friends spent the night in scraping and removing the tar, and
washing and cleansing my body; so that by morning I was ready to be
clothed again. This being the Sabbath morning, the people assembled for
meeting at the usual hour of worship, and among them came also the
mobbers; viz.: Simonds Ryder, a Campbellite preacher and leader of the
mob; one McClentic, who had his hands in my hair; one Streeter, son of a
Campbellite minister; and Felatiah Allen, Esq., who gave the mob a
barrel of whiskey to raise their spirits. Besides these named, there
were many others in the mob. With my flesh all scarified and defaced, I
preached to the congregation as usual, and in the afternoon of the same
day baptized three individuals. The next morning I went to see Elder
Rigdon, and found him crazy, and his head highly inflamed, for they had
dragged him by his heels, and those, too, so high from the ground that
he could not raise his head from the rough, frozen surface, which
lacerated it exceedingly; and when he saw me he called to his wife to
bring him his razor. She asked him what he wanted of it; and he replied,
to kill me. Sister Rigdon left the room, and he asked me to bring his
razor; I asked him what he wanted of it, and he replied he wanted to
kill his wife; and he continued delirious some days. The feathers which
were used with the tar on this occasion, the mob took out of Elder
Rigdon's house. After they had seized him, and dragged him out, one of
the banditti returned to get some pillows; when the women shut him in
and kept him a prisoner some time. During the mobbing one of the twins
contracted a severe cold, continued to grow worse until Friday, and then
died. The mobbers composed of various religious parties, but mostly
Campbellites, Methodists and Baptists, who continued to molest and
menace Father Johnson's house for a long time. Elder Rigdon removed to
Kirtland with his family--then sick with the measles--the following
Wednesday; and, on account of the mob, he went to Chardon on Saturday,
March 31st."

Sorry that was a long quote, but I wanted to get the whole thing in, and
then talk aobut it. So, we have a lot of wrap up to cover to get us all
the way to that little something extra I promised that'll finish out the
episode.

Let's start out with the names that Joe told us about in the mob. First
we had mention of Ezra Booth. Booth is a very interesting fellow in that
he was the first guy to make mention of polygamy in the church merely
months before this. He was also the first big apostate. He was the first
guy in a leadership position that actively apostatized, and wrote
"anti-mormon" literature, primarily talking about Joe's polygamist
intentions with the Natives. Remember that revelation we read earlier
that was recounted by Double Dub Phelps giving the commandment to take
the Natives to wife the way Abraham did? Well, that revelation first
came to light, thanks to Ezra Booth's apostasy. Double Dub Phelps merely
recalled it from memory a little while later. So Ezra Booth is
definitely a character worth mentioning in this context. 

In that list that began with Booth, it also listed Symonds Ryder. This
man has a fairly interesting story that can more or less be covered in a
paragraph or two. Symonds had heard a Mormon woman make a prophetic
claim that the city of Pekin, China would be destroyed soon. 6 weeks
after he heard this revelation, Ryder picked up a newspaper article that
told of a major earthquake that had destroyed a large percentage of
Pekin. In all my searching, I couldn't find a single record of that
happening, but nevertheless, Ryder saw it as divine providence, and thus
joined the church a little while after his friend Ezra Booth did. Ryder
was called on a mission by Joe, but he didn't go, because. . . God
spelled his name wrong. Symonds Ryder is spelled with "y's" where one
would expect "i's", and Ryder thought that the almighty god of the
universe would never make such a mistake as to misspell his name in a
divine revelation. To this day, his mission call is in D\&C 52:37,
spelled wrong, as it was in the History of the Church where I just read
it. That was Ryder's main red flag when it came to Joe, and why he
didn't embark on his mission.

Soon after Ryder received this mission call, Booth came home from his
mission to Missouri, both of these men lived in Hiram, Ohio at the time.
When these two old friends met up, as the story goes, they both asked
each other "How's your faith?" seemingly incredulously. At that point,
they both knew that they had the wool pulled over their eyes by Joe, and
both set out to correct the wrongs somehow. That's why both are
mentioned here, and why both were in the mob that dragged Joe out of the
house, and tarred and feathered him.

The next people listed in the beginning sentence were Eli Johnson,
Edward Johnson and John Johnson, Jun. Does anything ring a bell with
those young men? They were John Johnson's sons that didn't buy Joe's
thinly veiled bullshit. Lyman and Luke Johnson stayed in the church, and
Luke even died in Utah having served his entire life in the church. The
other Johnson boys, didn't quite fall for Joe's shenanigans. They had
converted with the rest of the family in early 1831, after Joe healed
their mother's arm, but by this time, a year later, they had given up
all semblance of holiness and piety that Joe was trying to portray. I
have a theory about why they were included in the mob, but let's talk
about the actual occurence before I propose this theory. Just to be
clear, this theory is by no means original. People have thought this for
a long time, but that will be discussed after we deconstruct this
fateful night of March 24, 1832.

To start us off, Joe and Emma had been taking care of little Joseph S.,
and Julia Murdock Smith who were both sick with the measels. They were
just shy of 11 months old at this time. Emma went to bed with Julia
taking care of her, while Joe took little Joseph S., to bed with him on
the trundle bed in the living room of the Johnson house. 

Soon after dozing off with little Joseph Murdock in his arms, Joe awoke
to a dozen men rushing into the house, with Emma screaming in the
background. The group of men dragged Joe outside, first by the hair,
then by grabbing his limbs so he couldn't struggle free. Joe was able to
free up one leg, and kicked a man with it, inflicting enough damage to
make the man bleed.

After Joe inflicted this hit, the mob was sure not to let Joe get any
footing, or let any of his limbs free. I said earlier that Joe was a
scrapper, and this goes to show just how hardcore he was. He said "those
who had hold of me to keep\[kept\] me from touching the ground (as they
had done all the time), lest I should get a spring upon them" probably
because it was true. The mob knew that if Joe could get any advantage,
he would exploit it, and he may overpower a couple of them and get away.

The group of men dragged Joe about 500 feet from the house, stripped him
naked and discussed what to do with him. Joe looked over and saw
Hingepin Rigdon laying on the ground covered in tar, supposing him dead.
Here, a small detail comes into play that Joe sort of left out. This was
written by Luke Johnson, and it's a very important detail, recounted in
an 1858 publication of the Deseret News.

"While Joseph was yet at my father's, a mob of forty or fifty came to
his house, a few entered his room in the middle of the night, and Carnot
Mason dragged Joseph out of bed by the hair of his head; he was then
seized by as many as could get hold of him, and taken about forty rods
from the house, stretched on a board, and tantalized in the most
insulting and brutal manner; they tore off the few night clothes that he
had on, for the purpose of emasculating him, and had Dr. Dennison there
to perform the operation \[castration\]; but when the Dr. saw the
Prophet stripped and stretched on the plank, his heart failed him, and
he refused to operate."

We'll talk about that in a minute, because it implies premeditation, and
an act of passion. Upon stripping Joe naked, and attempting to castrate
him, the mob decided to feed him some hot tar, but Joe wouldn't allow
the tar paddle to get in his mouth. Instead, the mob tried to feed him a
vial of poison, thus breaking one of Joe's teeth in the mix. From this
point on, Joe would have a very subtle lisp because of that broken
tooth. 

Somehow, the vial broke, and didn't end up going down Joe's throat,
which is good, because it probably would have made him very very ill for
a while, and Joe had a lot to do after this beating. Once the mob failed
to kill or castrate Joe, one man went into Rigdon's house to grab a
couple of pillows for the feathers. It's recounted that "a woman"
trapped this man in the house for a moment, but I assume that's
referring to Pheobe Rigdon, Hingepin's wife.

While this was going on, the mob scratched Joe "like a mad cat". About
the time the man got free from the woman in Rigdon's house with pillows
in hand, John Johnson came running out of the house to help Rigdon and
Joe. He ran up to the men that were beating up Rigdon, and swung his
club at one man hitting him, probably doing a fair amount of damage.
After this, the mob presumably turned on John Johnson, forcing him to
run back towards his house where Emma was undoubtedly inconsolable,
thinking the mob was killing her husband. As John Johnson made his way
back to the house, a man named John Poorman, in an effort to help Joe
and Rigdon, thought that John Johnson was part of the angry mob. It was
the middle of the night, and you see a man running towards a house with
screaming children and a weeping Emma in it, you're going to assume the
worst. 

So Poorman intercepts Johnson, and hits him with a rock or hammer or
something very painful, sending Johnson to the ground. That's right, the
two good guys in the story just fought it out. Once Poorman struck
Johnson, he realized what had happened, and he ran to hide in the
bushes, thinking he had killed Johnson.

The man came back from Rigdon's with the pillows, and coated the tar
covered Rigdon and Joe with feathers, and the mob disbanded. 

Joe came to conciousness, and walked his bruised and scratched body to
the Johnson's house, where Emma saw him covered in tar, and thinking it
was blood fainted straightaway. That night, the Johnsons and some other
friends spent hours scraping off the cooling tar from Joe and Rigdon's
flesh. 

When tar cools, it tends to harden, adhering to whatever surface it's
on. That means that when these people were pulling the cooling tar off
Joe and Rigdon, it was peeling off layers of skin at the same time,
leaving their skin tender and bleeding. I can't imagine a worse night
than cleaning up after something like this.

The day following this incident was Sunday, wherein Joe was smart
enough, and able bodied enough to preach to the Hiram, Ohio
congregation. This was one of the smartest things Joe ever did in his
entire career. 

With any given religion or cult, there is a correlation between
religious persecution, and growth in size and membership. A religion
needs the perfect amount of persecution in order to flourish, but if
there's too much persecution, the religion suffocates under the
pressure. Well, if a religious leader is able to use that persecution to
light a fire under the collective asses of the parishoners, they
instantly feel validated, and that leader has a lifetime worth of
followers.

Imagine the speech that Joe gave on the stand after he'd spent the night
getting beaten up, and subsequently more damaged from the removal of the
tar. He must have stood up there, skin red and raw, chunks of hardened
tar still on some of his face and all through his hair, pounding the
pulpit saying these apostates and anti-Mormons will never take us down.
The Church of Christ will not go quietly into the night\! It will set at
defiance man and his god for generations to come\! And the persecution
complex is made real for the rest of the entire Mormon religion. They
just tend to leave out the possibility that it all could have been due
to Joe's rapacious lust for younger women.

I remember being a young child watching movies depicting the faceless
mob that dragged the holy prophet out of his house and tarred and
feathered him. You can see this depicted in the legacy movie called
"Joseph Smith: The Prophet of the Restoration" . It's free on youtube,
look it up minute 25 is what we're talking about here, and yes there
will be a link for it in the show notes. Watch the whole thing if you
can stand it. I recently tortured myself with it, and exactly 0 out of a
hundred percent of me enjoyed it. The church uses this persecution to
further their message all of the time, and it works beautifully. This is
a great example of a religion needing the perfect concoction of
religious persecution and missionary work in order to thrive.

After Joe stood in front of the congregation raw and bruised, he went to
see how Hingepin Rigdon was faring. Apparently the mob had dragged
Rigdon out by the heels bumping his head against the frozen ground,
causing his brain to swell. We know that Rigdon wasn't necessarily
mentally stable before this, and this incident certainly couldn't have
helped. 

I would also like to point out that what happened is a bit of a call
back to Rigdon's childhood. If we remember from episode 14, Rigdon's
brother gave testimony stating that Rigdon at a young age fell off a
horse, and caught his leg in the stirrup. The horse dragged Rigdon for
quite some time with his head bouncing against the dirt and rocks on the
ground, possibly even getting trampled by the horse a couple of times.
His brother said that Hingepin was never the same after that. We also
know that Rigdon was prone to trances and occasional siezures, possibly
due to this childhood accident. So Rigdon being dragged by the mob with
his head bouncing against the ground for almost 500 feet, must have been
at least a little bit reminiscent of his childhood accident.

When Joe went to see him, Rigdon's brain was probably swollen, according
to Joe's description. Once Joe got there, Rigdon asked his wife Phoebe
for his razor for the purpose of killing Joe. Let's think about this for
a minute. It's understandable that Rigdon was fever crazed, and arguably
brain damaged when this happened, which can cause a person to have
homocidal thoughts very easily. But, let's try and understand this from
a naturalistic perspective.

Let's take a step back for a moment here, why did the mob attack Joe in
the first place? It's too easy to default to calling it religious
persecution, even though that's what the explanation has been since it
happened, but was there something more to it?

Earlier in the episode I listed off the names of the Johnson family that
converted to Mormonism in 1831. Well, one of the names listed was
Marinda Nancy Johnson. She would later come to be known as Marinda Nancy
Johnson Hyde Smith Smith Hyde. Those last four marriage names are
chronological, I think she actually only went by Marinda Hyde. 

Marinda's story is quite interesting in that she married Orson Hyde, and
then in typical Joe fashion, Joe sent Hyde on a mission to Jerusalem and
other places for 3 years, during which, Marinda married Joe twice, once
in 1842, once in 1843. Once Orson Hyde returned, he took her back as his
wife, while marrying two other women soon after. Thus the name Marinda
Nancy Johnson Hyde Smith Smith Hyde. Those were all of her marriage
names in chronological format.

To get back on board with the story, Marinda was 16 when Joe moved in to
the Johnson household with Emma and the twins in mid September of 1831,
Joe was 26. Now there isn't really any tangible evidence that we can
point to, in order to properly assert that Joe and Marinda had a very
special night together, but, we can consider the character of Joe, look
at the evidence, pay attention to the names of the people that were part
of the mob, and draw a line between the dots.

At least two of the people in the mob were the brothers of Marinda
Johnson, and they wanted to CASTRATE JOSEPH SMITH\!\!\! They even had
Dr. Dennison on hand to perform it, implying that it was premeditated,
and it was an act of passion. You don't castrate a man, just because he
claims to be the one true prophet of god, you castrate him because he
fucked your 16 year old sister\! 

I have to clarify, this is all up to conjecture. I'm merely speculating
on the circumstances, and like I said, drawing a line between the dots.
We don't have any smoking gun proof that Joe and Marinda went toe to toe
in 1832. We have it on good authority that they had a good ol' time in
1842 during the Nauvoo years, but in this specific instance, we don't
have any tangible proof. But really, what more do you need? Do we need
to attempt to perform a semen sample test on a century old corpse? Do we
need to find Joe's teeth imprint on Marinda's shoulder to prove they
were engaged in passionate bed shaking? The smoking gun evidence simply
doesn't exist here, as much as we would like it to. But, we do know
Joe's character, and we know that he got around A LOT\! We know that
there had been multiple accusations from multiple people in very
different locations claiming that Joe was a frisky sumbitch, and it
would eventually get him killed. And then, to top it all off, we have
Marinda's brothers wanting to cut Joe's balls off. I'll ask again, what
more do you need? Is it any mystery why Rigdon wanted to kill Joe too?
Joe's balls elicited Rigdon's most horrible beating of his life, and his
brain was swollen from physical damage, and a fever brought on by said
swollen brain and the measels. That can drive any man to want to kill
another man, much less the man that was responsible for the beating in
the first place. It wouldn't even require the implied brain damage to
want to kill Joe at this point.

To close out this episode, let's follow in that vein. Let's really talk
about Hingepin Rigdon, and bring in that special little something I
promised earlier.

Leading up to the time that this bad night occured, Joe and Rigdon had
been working tirelessly on their inspired translation of the bible. By
this time, they were in the new testament, possibly working on the book
of Revelation. In addition to the bible, they were coming up with all
kinds of amazing revelations, including some that are considered to be
the most distinguishing revelations that make Mormonism it's own
religion, as opposed to just another repackaged Christianity. This is a
list taken from LDS.org about the revelations that came around during
this 6 month period from mid September 1831 to early April of 1832. If
anybody listens to the MyBoM podcast, they've heard David and I reading
the D\&C during the Joe years. The revelations are so boring and
repetitive, saying the same exact things in slightly different ways over
and over again. Well, this list of revelations are quite unique, and
tend to stand out from a lot of the other revelations contained in the
D\&C.

[D\&C Section 1](http://scriptures.lds.org/dc/1)  — 

This was a magical time in the history of the church. Rigdon and Joe
together in harmony producing amazing revelations that set mormonism
apart from all the other off the wall Christianities that were cropping
up all over new America at the time. 

There is one main question I want to ask. Is there something more to
this time that Hingepin Rigdon and Joe were working together. If you
read the revelations that I just listed off, you can see that some of
them are a fair amount more mystical and spiritual than the others,
especially section 76.

Let's get to that treat I've been promising for a while. After Joe died
in the Carthage shootout, Hingepin Rigdon set out to form his own
congregation, colloquially called the Rigdonite sect. Rigdon lead his
church by revelations that he was constantly spouting off until he died
in July 1876. Unfortunately for everybody, when Rigdon was on his death
bed, he told his wife Phoebe to burn everything, and she did. There's no
telling what amazing things were lost in that one selfish act, maybe a
marked up and heavily edited Manuscript Found was somewhere in there, we
will never know. But, luckily for us, Rigdon sent copies of his
revelations to various people to direct the actions of his church, which
was called "The Church of Jesus Christ of the Children of Zion". The
main person he sent these revelations to was a man named Stephen Post,
who was a very active member with a leadership role in Rigdon's church.
He collected all the revelations he could, and compiled them together,
and that collection is currently held in the University of Utah
archives. I'm going to read a little excerpt from that collection of
over 100 individual revelations.

This is from the revelations of the Rigdonite church, given January
1<sup>st</sup>, 1874, almost 30 years after Joseph Smith was dead. To
provide some context, Rigdon is channelling a DEAD PROPHET in this
revelation.

"Behold I am Phineas the son of Eliezur who was the son of Aaron, and
according to the law and power of the holy priesthood, which priesthood
has power as ministering angels, when they maintain their priesthood in
the flesh during all their fleshly existence in purity. I Phineas being
of the high priesthood and having been adjudged by the courts above as
one who had honoured the holy priesthood during all my days I obtained
the privilege and power of ministering to those in the flesh who had
obtained & were consecrated to the priesthood.

Therefore I Phineas speak to you my son in the priesthood as a father to
his son knowing the character of you\[r\] calling & the solemnity of its
influence, and the manner in which you will be assailed by the devices
of the adversary that he may bring you under condemnation and cast you
down at his feet. To preserve the priesthood of his church from
begin\[being\] overcome by the Devil, the Lord of Zion has given a law,
the strict obedience to which will shield them against all the subtle
artifices of Satan, and enable them to overcome the devil, the world,
and the flesh."

And it goes on, and on, and on like that. Chapter after chapter, divine
revelation after divine revelation from the almighty god, Rigdon
produced these almost constantly after starting his own Rigdonite church
in 1856. It's odd, but a similar writing style that was present in Joe's
Mormonism, was also present 12 years after his death in Hingepin Sidney
Rigdon's church. 

Now, this seems to lead us to a couple of damning questions. Who was
really coming up with these revelations once Joe and Rigdon were able to
sequester themselves away from the world for a short time? Was it Joseph
Smith who was convicted for being a fraud, or was Sidney Rigdon more of
a Hingepin piece in Mormon history than he's been given credit for? 

Bonus: Joe and Rigdon flipped their canoe = divine revelation to not
travel by water
