---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 44 - The Battle Begins
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-44-battle-begins/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-44-the-battle-begins
libsyn_embed: 4917701
redirect_from: /2016/12/16/ep-44-the-battle-begins/

category: History
date: 2016-12-15 17:57:53 PST
---

Episode 44 – The Battle Begins

On this episode, we finally jump into the Gallatin election day battle
and the aftermath. Two diametrically opposed mobs matched each other’s
ante as things continually escalate out of control. Jo and Rigdon take
the Danites to Diahmen to impose their will upon elected officials.
Lilburn Boggs organizes a militia to answer the Mormon aggression of 150
stripling warriors cascading across county lines in violation of
Missouri law. Nobody holds the legal or ethical high ground as violent
rhetoric is matched by violent action on both sides of the
Mormon-Missouri conflict.

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Outro music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Links:

Reed Peck manuscript  
<http://www.mormoninformation.com/reedpeck.htm>

Welcome to episode 44 of the NMPC the serial Mormon history podcast.
Today is Dec. 14 2016, my name is Bryce Blankenagel and thank you for
joining me.

Tensions were high between the Mormons and Missourians after Rigdon’s
red sermon. Many Missourians were totally cool with the Mormons as long
as they kept to themselves, but the Mormons had no intention of doing
so.

From Richmond court proceedings

“as early as April last, at a meeting, in Far West, of 8 or 12 persons,
Mr. Rigdon, arose and made an address to them in which he spoke of
having bo\<u\>rne persecutions & lawsuits & other privations, and did
not intend to bear them any longer. That they meant to resist the law,
and if a sheriff came after them with writs they would kill \<him\>. and
if any body opposed them they would take off their heads. Geo W Harris
who was present observed, you menat the head of their influence I
suppose\<?\> Rigdon answered, he meant, that lump of flesh & bones
called the skull or scalp.”

“Robert Snodgrass court testimony quoting Jo: That the time had now come
that the Saints should \<rise &\> take the kingdom, \<and they should\>
do it by the \<sword of the \> Spirit, and if not, by the sword of
power”

After Lyman Johnson had been ex-d and exiled, a friend of his named
George Walter quoted Jo saying: “it was a time of war, and to permit
persons who are right in among them to go out and carry news, would
never do it by taking their lives. .. the militia wsa nothing but a mob,
\<that\> the state of Missouri was a mob. & that the governor himself
was a mob character… it \<is\> time to lay religion aside and take up
\<our\> guns”

George Hinkle recalled Jo saying: “...he believes Mahommet was a good
man, that the Koran was not a true thing, but the world believed
Mahommet as they beli\[e\]ved him. & that he believed Mahommet a true
prophet.”

Why would Jo call Muhammed such a cool guy?

Samuel Kimble told of Jo standing in front of and armed mob, probably
the Danites saying: “It was impossible to please a mob, that he had
applied to the Governor, and he understood the governor said he could do
nothing for us, he said that the whole state was a mob, and that the
governor was nothing but a mob, & if he come upon them he would make war
upon him. He cursed the state as a damn mob & that God would damn them.
He observed that the people might think he was swearing, but that the
Lord would not take notice of it.”

It wasn’t just the Missourians Rigdon and Jo were railing against.

Abner Scovel said this in reference to Rigdon soon after Double-Dub
Phelps and Freddy G. Willey were rebaptized after their excommunication
in April.

“Soon after the time that Phelps & Williams was baptized, (about the
last of June last) I heard Sidney Rigdon say, in Far West, that if
Phelps or Williams apostatised again, or \<set up against the government
or kingdom\>, the Lord would kill them in half an hour, or would put it
into the hearts of his saints to kill them”

One of the causes we can point to that lead to so much chaos at this
time was a desperation for resources. We know that Jo, Rigdon, and many
of the Mormon refugees that were moving to Missouri had absolutely
nothing. The only thing the Mormons brought with them en masse from Ohio
to Missouri was their poverty. Poverty today is much different than
Poverty of the 1830’s. We have much broader access to resources than
they ever did. If people in the 1830’s were poor going into the Missouri
winter, they very well might not emerge on the other side of the winter
with as many numbers as they went into it with. Each person was
responsible for gathering enough food stores to last the winter, but
when you have thousands of people moving into an area that’s already
starved for resources, it creates an even deeper vacuum resulting in
people starving… literally starving to death for want of resources.

When Jo and Rigdon moved to Missouri in January, there were enough
people there to support them with the few excess resources they had to
finish out the winter and get into spring. As 1838 progressed however,
it became abundantly clear that there weren’t going to be enough crops
in the ground to support the influx of refugees fleeing Ohio. If the
Mormon leadership didn’t do something, the flock would starve and
everybody that was with them going into the winter of 1838-1839 may not
be there in the Spring.

Add in to the desperation for resources the fact that it was an election
year, and we’re seeing this powder keg slowly filling, threatening an
explosion to take everybody down.

The Mormons represented a voting bloc that couldn’t be ignored by those
who were running for any office in the counties North of Jackson in
Missouri. Daviess County had essentially been sanctioned as Mormonville
where they had reasonable belief that no Missourian would bother the
Mormons there if they merely kept to themselves. As we know, Jo and
Rigdon weren’t much for leaving sleeping dogs to lie and their
aggressive expansion upon arrival scared the Missourians that had
agreements with the Mormons to stay in Daviess, Clay, and Caldwell
counties. As this influx of Mormon refugees was injected into the
population, politicians began pandering to the Mormons to get their
vote. The Mormons were made up of a fairly balanced mix of Democrats and
Whigs, but they were happy to vote for anybody that claimed to be on
their side, regardless of party affiliation.

A man named William Peniston…. yep…. better than being named
Penisfeather I suppose… was the main politician pandering to the
Mormons, focusing most of his energy on General Lyman Wight, one of the
leading Danites.

“Peniston was a rough, quarrelsome fellow, but he had more influence in
Daviess county in 1838 than any other man.’ recalled Joseph McGee, who
ran a clothing store in Gallatin. Peniston had previously objected to
the saints’ immigration into Daviess, but when Wight questioned him
regarding his opposition, Peniston replied that ‘he never designed to
drive them out of the County \[and\] that if he could not scare them so
as to cause them to leave, he intended to let them alone.’ Another
non-Mormon resident, perhaps sent by a local candidate, went out among
the Saints to find out whom they supported for the county offices. The
older settlers realized that whoever received the Mormon vote would win
the election.” 1838 Missouri Mormon war pg. 59-60

When vicious politics are thrown into this mix, it’s like that powderkeg
from before was just doused in Kerosene. August 8th 1838 marked this
monumental election that held the fate of the Mormons in Missouri in the
balance. Everybody knew it. The Missourians that hated the Mormons had
strong motivations to stop their voting as it would probably influence
the next decade of politics, and the Mormons, as well as those
non-Mormon Missourians who were sympathetic to them, knew that if they
could just get a few politicians into office that are on their side,
things might just get a little tiny bit better than the shit sandwich
they’d been eating for half a decade in Missouri. Who knows, if enough
Mormons and Mormon sympathizers are elected, they may even be reinstated
to their homes in Jackson county and bring the mob that chased them out
to justice. These may be pie in the sky hopes, but it was the package
the leadership sold to the members, and they were motivated to vote or
die motherfucker.

Peniston failed in gaining the Mormon vote, and in flip-flopper fashion
as is known with many politicians, he began railing against the Mormons
to try and eliminate their influence on the election. He was running as
a Whig, and once Lyman Wight challenged him on his loyalty to the
Mormons, Peniston took that as a sign that the Mormons would be voting
for his Democratic opponent. On August 8th, election day in Gallatin,
Peniston stood on an old barrel and began calling the Mormons “horse
thieves, liars, counterfeiters, and dupes, and boasted to the crowd that
he had previously led a company of men that ordered the Saints to leave
the county. “If we suffer such men as those to vote, you will soon lose
your suffrage.” Bullshit fearmongering showing his own desperation to
get elected by suppressing the Mormon vote.

Peniston just lit the match. As he stepped down from the barrel, he
called everyone in attendance to have a drink. Roughly 30 Mormons were
in attendance waiting to vote in Gallatin that day, and as Peniston
stepped down, they watched in cautious silence. The Missourians passed
around whiskey and began drinking, some of the Mormons may have as well,
it’s unclear.

                                                                                                                                                              Then,
a man named Dick Weldon, good friend of Peniston, boasted joyfully that
the Mormons hadn’t been allowed to vote in Clay county “no more than the
negroes.” After saying that he turned to a Mormon named Samuel Brown, a
shoemaker, and this is the exchange between them.

“Are you a Mormon preacher, sir?” Dick asked Brown.

“Yes, sir, I am.” Brown replied

“Do you Mormons believe in healing the sick by laying on hands, speaking
in tongues, and casting out devils?”

“We do,”

“You are a damned liar\[\!\] Joseph Smith is a damned imposter,”

At that moment, somebody threw a punch and our keg exploded. It’s
recorded that Brown hit Dick, but I’m more inclined to think Dick was
hittin Brown. Suddenly 5 Mormons jumped into the fight trying to pull
the men apart and the whiskeyed-up Missourians thought they were just
jumping in to help Brown beat up Dick. A brawl ensued. Men were kicking,
punching, and body slamming each other in a drunken fueled rage.

1838 Mormon war in Missouri pg 62-63: “John L. Butler, a large and
powerful Mormon, rankled at the abuse heaped upon his people. “The first
thing that came to my mind was the covenants entered into by the Danites
to the effect that they were to protect each other, etc.,” Butler
recalled, “and I hollowed out to the top of my voice saying ‘O yes, you
Danites, here is a job for us,’” When Butler gave the Danite signal of
distress, about ten more Latter-day Saints ran to the defense of their
brethren. seeing this, forty or fifty Missourians stepped in to battle
the Mormons.

“I had witnessed many knock-downs in my time, but none on so grand a
scale,” wrote Joseph McGee, a non Mormon observer of the fight. The
Participants used no guns, but struck at one another with whips, clubs,
rocks, and knives. The Mormons rallied behind Butler, who wielded a
large wooden club he found in a nearby pile of wood. “When I called out
for the Danites a power rested upon me such as one as I never felt
before,... I never struck a man the second time, and while knocking them
down, I really felt that they would soon embrace the gospel.”

Our match lighter, Peniston, had run away at the first signs of
brawling, while Dick laid unconscious and bleeding from a massive gash
in his head, probably at the hand of Butler’s wooden club. A Mormon
retreated with a knife between his shoulderblades and everybody involved
in the scrap had bruises, gashes, and scrapes, but nobody was fatally
wounded. Despite being outnumbered, the Mormons somehow stood their
ground and the Missourians dispersed momentarily. The Mormons regrouped
and assessed the situation. Some of the Missourians were only running to
grab their guns to continue the fight, and the Mormons collectively
decided it was a good idea to run away.

This Gallatin election day battle marked the beginning of actual mob
violence between the Mormons and Missourians. The keg had exploded and
was now just a pile of burning wood but nobody realized it had exploded
inside a powder magazine and the damage was much worse than anybody
could understand.

Now that a fight had broken out, the rhetoric that both sides were
firing at each other was realized. Once word returned to the respective
leaders of the Missourians and the Mormons, suddenly they both had
license to act upon everything they’d been preaching in city council
meetings and from the pulpit over congregations. Nothing happened to
deescalate the situation and the Missouri mobs, along with Jo and
Rigdon, felt justified in using their own mobs to affect influence upon
each other.

Given the bullshit rhetoric we read at the beginning of this episode,
doesn’t this just seem like exactly what Rigdon and Jo were hoping for?
Jo revered Muhammed because he was a prophet and a war-lord. If anybody
talked shit about Mo, they were dead, just like Jo wanted for all the
people shit-talking him and the Mormons.

Rigdon called for a war of extermination repeatedly. He would no longer
follow the directions of a sheriff, threatening to kill any that
attempted to arrest him, and any legal action taken against the Mormons,
Rigdon effectively couched it as religious persecution, even though that
was a very small piece of the puzzle.

The Gallatin election battle made everything real. A catalyst like this
was everybody’s wet dream. Finally the Missourians had an actual act of
aggression from the Mormons they could point to in order to legally
justify raising an official militia to combat them. And finally, so long
after being chased out of Jackson county by a mob, the Mormons could
point to the Missourians mobbing against them to eradicate their vote,
which is tyrannical and treasonous in and of itself, and justify
everything they founded the Danites for in the first place.

The most terrifying part of all this was the misinformation spread in
month following the brawl. A Mormon named Josiah Morin rode to Far West
on August 6th, the day of the brawl, claiming there was a battle at
Gallatin and that two Mormons had died and the Missourians were refusing
them a proper burial. He also spread rumors that there was a mob forming
to drive the saints from Daviess county, just as they had been driven
from Jackson County 5 years prior. There was no foundation for his
claims, he was just spreading false information he’d heard from a friend
who told him about his dad who was there or something, Morin wasn’t even
at Gallatin the day before to be a reliable witness.

The Mormons weren’t the only ones working on false information. Rumors
were spreading to Jackson and Richmond counties that an epic battle
between the Mormons and Missourians had ensued and that the Danites had
killed a number of Missourians before retreating back to HQ in Far West.

Of course, Dewitt was also a problem as the Mormons there had been
threatened by the nearby Missouri mob. Once the Mormons living in Dewitt
heard about 2 Mormons being killed in Gallatin, they were put on red
alert awaiting the march of a mob on the little Mormon settlement there.

John Butler, the bear-Mormon who was swinging his club around and fuckin
up everybody, arrived in Far West to tell his first-hand account of the
fight at Gallatin, easing the collective fear that Mormons had died in
the fight, but that corrected information would take some time to spread
to all counties in Missouri. Most people were still operating under the
assumption that it had been an actual bloody and fatal battle, as
opposed to a bunch of drunk men throwin fisticuffs.

Upon receiving this corrected information from the bear-Mormon, Jo did
exactly what would be expected. He called together his counsellors,
Rigdon and his older brother Hyrum, and all the Danites in Far West and
rode immediately for Diahmen in Daviess County, where Butler had told of
a mob of 30 men surrounding his home. Expecting an armed mob of
Missourians to march on Diahmen, where most of the brawlers had feld to,
they fortified the town and cooked up a large batch of corn meal and
meat in preparation for a siege. No mob actually appeared to lay siege
to the town.

The next morning, Jo woke up, looked around at the town which had
survived the night without any fighting, and must have thought to
himself, “well, I have this mob of 150 armed men, what do I do with them
now?”

The answer is as appalling as it is expected. Jo decided to “visit” some
prominent Missourians living in Daviess county to see if they supported
the Mormons or if they would support a mob chasing them out of Daviess
county. Now, if you’re just a person that happens to be a judge or
sheriff, or god forbid, a politician in Daviess county, it’s incumbent
upon you to try your best to be objective and not be swayed to one side
or the other in public conflicts like this.

Well, judge Adam Black was one of these people. Black lived less than a
mile from the center of Diahmen, being one of the earliest settlers in
the area, long before it was designated as Mormonville. Black had
affiliation with an anti-Mormon mob earlier and Jo was anticipating his
participation in another mob now that all the shit was on fire after
Gallatin. Jo sent the Danites to deal with Black.

General Lyman Wight, Doctor Sampson Avard, and Cornelius P. Lott, 3
heavy hitters of the Danites, along with a small contingency of
participants in the Gallatin battle went to Judge Black’s house. Let’s
just take a second there…. (vamp)

When this small force of Danites arrived at Judge Black’s house, they
presented him with a written agreement stating that Black would disavow
any affiliation with the anti-Mormon Missourians and would essentially
pledge fealty to the Mormons, or at very least sympathy. Black,
disliking the Mormons already, refused to sign indignantly, claiming
that the Mormons had no right to require a justice of the peace sign
such a document, rightfully so. The Danites left Black’s home in
frustration, only to return soon after to attempt a second persuasion.
Black refused again.

Not taking this lying down, Jo gathered 100 armed men, most of them
Danites, and surrounded Black’s home. Doctor Sampson Avard, being one of
the heads of the Danites and a brutally intimidating man was chosen to
be spokesperson of the mob to Black stating, “We have come to be plain
with you, the only alternative is for you to sign this obligation.”

Black refused again and Avard told him that Jo was waiting outside to
speak with him should he continue to refuse. Black asked Avard if Jo
“shared Avard’s savage disposition” to which the reply was negative.

Black stepped out of his home to be greeted by the 100 strong armed mob
surrounding his house. He walked up to Jo and Jo said that “they would
not compel Black to act against his will, but asked that he sign to
allay the excitement among local Mormons, who feared anti-Mormon
violence.” Jo and Avard pulled some good cop bad cop shit, and it
worked…. sort of. Black still refused to sign the prepared statement
the Mormons brought with them, but did write a statement of his own
which reads:

“I, Adam Black, a Justice of the Peace of Daviess county, do hereby
Sertify to the people, coled Mormin, that he is bound to suport the
Constitution of this State, and of the United State, and he is not
attached to any mob, nor will not attach himself to any such people, and
so long as they will not molest me, I will not molest them. This the 8th
day of August, 1838.

Adam Black, J.P.”

The Danites weren’t done. Considering this a satisfactory victory over
their persecutors, they went and visited a number of other officials
throughout Daviess county including Sheriff William Morgan. They were
able to get some of these officials to sign statements similar to that
of Adam Black, but the underlying theme was against their will. If a guy
shows up at your house and asks you to sign something you don’t want to
sign, it’s essentially a criminal act. When that guy shows up with 100
armed men, it’s a little harder to deny their request, and it becomes
WAAAAAY more criminal. By compelling these people to sign legal
statements at the threat of armed violence with a mob behind him, Jo was
merely emulating his hero from earlier, Muhammed. He was using an army
to enforce his will. Jo’s idle threats of violence were now treading
ever closer to the realm of reality and there was no going back and no
way to deescalate the situation without somebody’s ego being eviscerated
and dragged through the mud.

Doctor Sampson Avard later was quoted on record saying, “if Black had
not signed the paper he did, it was the common understanding and belief
that he would have shared the fate of the dissenters.”

This is a quote from the Reed Peck manuscript which was sent over by
astute listener \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ “The blood of my best friend
mst flow by my own hands if I would be a faithful Danite should the
prophet command it,’ said A McRae in my hearing. ‘If Joseph should tell
me to kill Vanburen in his presidential chain I would immediately start
and do my to assassinate him\[,\] let the consequences be what they
would--Having been taught to believe themselves invincible in the
defence of their cause though the combined power of the world were in
array against them, and the purposes of God were to be accomplished
through their instrumentality, the wicked destroyed, by force of arms
the “nations subdued,” and the Kingdom of Christ established on the
Earth, they consider themselves accountable only at the bar of God for
their conduct and consequently acknowledged no law superior to the “word
of the Lord through the prophet”

That is fucking terrifying…... (vamp)

More from the Reed Peck manuscript, “The forces from Caldwell county
remained in Daviess two days and in the time compelled one individual to
sign an article binding him to keep the peace with the Mormons and
attempted to frighten a justice of the peace to sign the same\[,\] but
he drew one himself and signed it which was satisfactory\[.\] Warrants
were issued against J Smith L. Wight and many others engaged in this
affair and cause found sufficient to put them under bonds for their
appearance at court\[.\] Representations of these hostile movements of
the Mormons were sent by express to the neighboring counties which
created considerable exitement and but a short time elapsed before it
was rumoured that the inhabitants of Daviess county were determined that
the Mormons should be expelled from that county as it would be
impossible to live in peace with them.”

It’s a constitutionally protected right to peacefully assemble, even if
every single person in the assembly is armed, but it was against
Missouri state law to cross county borders with an armed mob, regardless
of its use. Given the actions taken by Jo, Sampson Avard, Lyman Wight,
and Hingepin Rigdon, they crossed county lines with their armed mob, and
then proceeded to persuade elected officials with the threat of violence
from that mob. This was illegal on many levels and could be classified
as an act of high treason.

In response to this newly realized threat, representatives from the
anti-Mormon Missourians, as well as a number of Mormon leaders met the
following evening in Diahmen to hash out the tension. This is one point
we can look at and say, “they did try to deescalate here,” but it was
all a facade. They met at the home of Lyman Wight and came to an
agreement to preserve the peace. Both sides agreed that they wouldn’t
protect anybody that had acted illegally and would faithfully deliver
them to the proper authorities. The two sides parted that evening on
friendly terms, but it wouldn’t last long.

Following the Mob actions at persuasion, Judge Black, Colonel Peniston
and a few others rode to Richmond and Jackson counties spreading rumors
of wildly exaggerated reports concerning what had happened in Daviess
county. They were claiming that 500 men under arms were threatening the
lives of Daviess citizens. Peniston, having lost the election because
the Mormons hated him, claimed that the Mormons intended to “intimidate
and drive from the county all the old citizens, and possess themselves
of their lands, or to force such as do not leave, to come into their
measures and submit to their dictation.”

With this new information that was blown incredibly out of proportion,
the legal council in Richmond issued subpeonas to Jo, Rigdon, and the
leaders of the Danites, as well as anybody they could tie in to the
Gallatin election fight or the shit that went down in Daviess the days
following.

A committee was organized to find out the truth of these circumstances
and serve the writs of arrest to Jo and others. When they arrived in
Millport, Judge Charles Morehead told them that Mormon lawlessness would
not be tolerated. “Every Mormon would be killed, unless they complied
with the laws of the state.”

General Lyman Wight, being the badass he was, replied with this: “he
owed nothing to the laws--the laws had not protected him--he had been on
the rack, and persecution had followed him these seven years--he had
suffered enough--God did not require him to endure more--and that he
would not yield to the laws of Missouri--he would sooner die and be
buried.”

Tensions were high, especially in Millport. Mill port was a mill town.
Essentially, there was a grocery store, probably a post office, and a
massive grist mill. The Missourians living in Millport were unfriendly
to the Mormons as a whole and every time the Mormons would go to
Millport to use the grist mill, their lives were threatened by the
Missourians living there. Just for some understanding of the geography,
Millport was in Daviess County about 5 miles south of the Mormon
settlement Diahmen, which also had some remaining Missourians that
weren’t Mormon.

In early September George A. Smith, cousin to Jo, and James Corbett went
to Millport to grind corn. As things were already a bit tense, the
Missourians in Millport wanted to fuck with the Mormons any chance they
could get. One of the people living near Millport was our good friend
and loser of the 1838 senatorial election, Robert Peniston. He
essentially blocked their access to the mill, claiming he was no friend
of the Mormons with half a dozen other men there to roadblock Smith and
Corbett from using the Mill. A fight nearly broke out again just like at
Gallatin a month earlier, but somehow the situation was allayed.

Josiah Morin, the Mormon who’d won the senatorial race against Peniston,
purchased and sold a different grist mill to fellow Mormons at Diahmen
so the Missourians could no longer stop the Mormons from using theirs at
Millport, and the Mormons wouldn’t fear for their lives every time they
needed to grind corn or wheat.

As September progresses, tensions continue to rise and things only
become more confusing. To say that all the Mormons and all the
Missourians stood in solidarity bitterly opposed to one another would be
an over simplification of the situation. There were plenty of Mormons
that just wanted to live their lives and plant their crops without being
bothered by the Missourians or the church leadership for that matter.
The majority of Missourians just wanted to live their lives, not caring
what their neighbor believes as long as their neighbors money will spend
and they dont bother anybody. The problem was the dick-size principle.

That’s the principle where when one guy feels threatened by another guy,
he has to whip out his dick and prove it’s bigger than the other guys
dick. Jo and Rigdon were being called out by the Missourians to show
everybody the size of their dicks, because they had been preaching from
the pulpit that their dicks are bigger than everybody else, especially
those anti-Mormon mobocrats. Then the elected officials in Missouri,
(Boggs, Doniphan, Atchison, Peniston, Black, etc.) heard that the
Mormons had really big dicks and they’re just waving them around for all
to see in Daviess and Carroll counties. What happens when a group of
guys thinks another group of guys have bigger dicks? They have to fuck
the guys claiming to have the bigger dicks until they can dominate the
other bigger dick group. Why do you think white men have oppressed black
men for so long? They know for a fact that black men’s dicks are bigger
so the white men have to repeatedly fuck the black men to stay dominant.
Humans have been playing this game of bones for hundreds of thousands of
years, and I would assume our hominid ancestors did the same.

The problem rests with large groups of people being led by insecure
dicks with small dicks that want everybody to know how big their dick
is, even if it requires some grand public gestures and marching bodies
of men around marching to the sound of a battle drum hit with a dick
shaped drumstick, and shooting their dick shaped bullets at each other.
The point I’m trying to make is that outside this small group of men on
either side that were constantly ruminating about how big the other
groups dicks are, the vast majority of the people living under these
moronic alpha-males just wanted to live their lives without constantly
being fucked by dicks big or small. People are simple that way, give
them a place to live and grow crops and shit in peace, they’ll just keep
doing that for generations until they die. That was the American dream
back then, but instead, we have Jo and Rigdon on one side and the
anti-Mormon Missouri government on the other side of the cockflict, and
they dragged everybody along behind them. The majority of Missourians
didn’t care what the Mormons did or believed as long as it didn’t
infringe on their rights in any way. On the flipside, the majority of
Mormons were glad to be living in Daviess or Caldwell counties and just
live their lives. They didn’t want to start any shit with the
Missourians, they were outnumbered nearly everywhere. The Mormons just
wanted land to farm and to be able to put food in their mouths and raise
their children peacefully, but the leadership of both sides wouldn’t
allow it to happen.

What we’re studying right now is some highly biased history. We’re
studying the events that were exciting enough to merit print, but those
events only involved small groups of people. Most of the people living
in Missouri at this time were just farming, tanning, making goods,
providing services, just living their lives and watching everything we
read about now play out in front of them. But, nobody writes in their
journal entries about how good the farming was, and how nice the weather
treated their crops because they were too preoccupied with militias
being raised and marching across county lines to enforce the will of
those with small dicks.

John Corrill was a Mormon living in Far West. He’s come up a few times
before, but nothing terribly significant in our timeline has involved
John Corrill. I’m going to read a excerpt from the 1838 Mormon War in
Missouri by Stephen LeSueur, one of my main resources I’ve been relying
on heavily to understand this year in history.

“In late August\[,\] John Corrill told some Mormons who had newly
arrived in Far West that he did not think the Mormons were duty bound to
join the United Firms and “he had no confidence in the revelation that
required it.” Smith and Rigdon, upon hearing of this remark, reprimanded
Corrill for making such expressions in the presence of brethren “who
might perhaps be weak in the faith.” (Of course they were weak in the
faith, they’d just been forced to move 1000 miles in the hottest part of
summer because the Kirtland church had excommunicated Jo and Rigdon) “If
you tell about the streets again that you do not believe this or that
revelation I will walk on your neck Sir,” the Prophet told Corrill as he
smacked his fists together to illustrate his point. Corril replied that
he would not yield his judgement to anything proposed by the Church, or
by individuals in the Church, or by Joseph Smith, even when Smith
purported to be peaking for God. Corrill said he was a republican;
consequently, he would do, say, act, and believe what he pleased.

“If you do not act differently and shwo yourself apporved you shall
never be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven,” Smith responded. “I will
stand at the entrance and oppose you myself and will keep you out if I
have to take a fisty cuff in doing it.”

“I may possibly get there first,” Corrill replied.”

(vamp)

In anticipation of more Mormon violence, Lilburn Boggs, Governor of
Missouri, organized an armed militia of 500 men in Richmond bound for
Daviess county to detain and hold trial for the Mormon leadership.
Unfortunately, Boggs was working off rumors that the Mormons had acted
with hostility and taken Missourians captive. Once the rumors were
dispelled, Boggs disbanded the militia that was aching to show the
Mormon in Diahmen how big their dicks are. It was only a temporary
respite as the militia would be gathered again in half a month’s time to
actually make the march and lay siege to Dewitt and Far West.
Unfortunately for us, those will have to be topics discussed upon the
arrival of the new year.

I’m really trying to make sense of all this chaos. Today’s episode only
covered a month and a half of time and trust me, I left a lot of details
out that would just make everything even more confusing. (vamp)

Bonus:

“A letter from Hiram Comstock, written 12 August and sent to the
citizens of Carroll County, reported that the Mormons had overrun
Daviess County, destroyed crops, threatened the lives of prominent
citizens, threatened to attack Jackson County, and were “fortifying for
a siege” in Far West. Comstock also reported that the citizens of
Daviess County had sent representatives to Clay, Ray, Jackson, and
Lafayette counties, but it was “seriously believed” that the Mormons had
captured and killed the men.
