---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 32 - Smith v. Smith Aftermath of Zion’s Camp
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-32-smith-v-smith-aftermath-zions-camp/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-32-smith-v-smith-aftermath-of-zions-camp
category: History
date: 2016-04-14 09:25:13 PDT
---

Ep 32 – Smith v. Smith Aftermath of Zion's Camp

On this episode, we cover the History of the Church recounting of
Sylvester Smith v. Joseph Smith. A couple of month's long journey had
riled up some unfriendly feelings between Sylvester and Joe, but
luckily, Joe wasn't in the wrong for any situation, and everything was
Sylvester's fault. After that we talk about organizing the quorum of the
Twelve Apostles, and finish out with a discussion about the 1835 version
of the First Vision account. 

Show Links:

Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/ 

Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>

Links:

Messenger and Advocate February 1835:

<http://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/cdm/ref/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/7160>

22 year old activist suicide article:

<http://www.lgbtqnation.com/2016/04/22-year-old-gay-mormon-activist-commits-suicide/>

Irreligiosophy Podcast:

<http://www.irreligiosophy.com/>

Welcome to episode 32 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, the serial Mormon
history podcast. Today is April 14<sup>th</sup> 2016, my name is Bryce
Blankenagel, and thank you for joining me.

Last historical episode was part 2 of the march of Zion's camp to
Missouri and the various problems the camp encountered along the way. We
had David Michael on to add in his knowledge of military history as a
fellow history nerd, and honestly, I had a really good time talking
about Joe's first military campaign that ended with a non-epic
non-climax and simply making the situation, in Missouri, worse than it
was to begin with.

This march was undertaken for the purpose of reinstating the Missouri
Mormons, that had been chased out of Independence, back into their homes
and businesses. The Missourians hated the Mormons with their
anti-slavery progressivism, and really wanted them out of Jackson
County, which was born out with the Battle for Zion that happened in
November of 1833. Once word came back about the Mormons being displaced
from their homes, while their few possessions were looted, and houses
burned down, Joe decided to be the big man, and organize a militia to
answer violence with more violence. 

After many trials and tribulations, Joe ended up backing down and
disbanding Zion's camp, and the Missouri Mormons were given asylum in
Clay and Caldwell Counties, just north of Jackson County. By the time
the march of Zion's camp was over, 14 people had died from cholera, and
the only gunshot wound was from a man who accidentally shot himself in
the leg with his pistol. All in all, for marching a band of 200 armed
men over 1000 miles, it's a bit surprising that this was the only
gunshot wound that happened, so that's worth giving kudos to at very
least. 

But where the big problems sets in, is when you consider the entirety of
the campaign and the aftermath of it. The Missouri Mormons didn't have
much in the way of supplies and staples, and that's why this march was
organized in the first place. Joe wanted to help relieve the pressures
that were stemming from lack of resources in Missouri, but, in Joe
fashion, he Joe'd the whole thing up pretty badly. He only collected
barely 10% of the money necessary to help the Missouri Mormons get out
of the financial hardships they were dealing with, and still made the
march. The whole time Zion's camp was traversing across state lines,
they were short on water, food, and many other necessary staples. Once
they arrived in Liberty, Missouri, riddled with cholera, they merely
exacerbated the problems the Missouri Mormons were dealing with in the
first place, which was primarily a lack of supplies. They just brought
along Cholera for the fun of it, which took out Algernon Sidney Gilbert,
or as we knew him Asid Glibert.

Zion's camp didn't even have enough supplies to make the 1000 mile
journey back to Kirtland once things were settled in Missouri, forcing
some of them to stay behind, while Joe's closest possee took the last
remaining money and supplies to finance their own trip back to HQ in
Kirtland.

After all was said and done, Joe only made the Missouri problem
exponentially worse, and served to drive a wedge in the negotiations
that were underway between the Missouri Mormons and the other people
living in Missouri that had chased them out of Jackson County. I'm
convinced that the only way this could have gone worse is if there was
indeed a firefight between Zion's camp and the Missouri militia, but
even then it could have been woven into the fabric of the Mormon
persecution complex, which would have possibly made the march more
successful in the grand scheme of things. All things considered, I'm
pretty sure that what really happened, was the worst possible scenario,
and is the most monumental fuck up in all of Joe's history up to this
point. He Joe'd it up pretty badly.

We ended the episode with talking about Sylvester Smith, no relation to
Joseph Smith, and his constant nagging voice of dissent during the whole
march. Once they arrived back in Kirtland, Sylvester tried to bring up
charges against Joe, the allegations of which are a bit fuzzy, and
Sylvester was subsequently excommunicated for his misdeeds. He was
reinstated after signing a confession admitting fault on his part, which
he subsequently recanted, after which he signed another statement
fearing punishment, and was permanently reinsated into the church... at
least for another couple of years, but we'll talk about that when it
becomes relevant, and we'll cover the trial in detail very soon.

That's it for the roundup of the last historical episodes, let's get
into the meat of today's episode.. the aftermath of Zion's camp.

Let's begin by trying to parse out the details in the case of Sylvester
Smith vs. Joseph Smith. When the small contingency of Zion's camp
returned, Sylvester brought up unknown charges against Joe, and a
disciplinary council was held to determine guilt on the part of Joe.
This is from the History of the Church, vol 2 starting on 147.

"On the 23<sup>rd</sup> of August, a council was convened for the
purpose of hearing the resolutions designed for the Star, which were to
be drawn up by Elders Oliver Cowdery, Thomas Burdick, and Orson Hyde, on
the subject of the difficulty existing between President Joseph Smith,
Jun., and Sylvester Smith. Elder Reynolds Cahoon presided in consequence
of the ill health of Bishop Whitney."

And then it goes on to detail the legal statements made concerning the
matter.

"Whereas a report having come to this place censuring the conduct of
President Joseph Smith, Jun., relative to his proceedings during his
late journey to and from Missouri; and whereas said report was
calculated to create an unfavorable influence as regards the moral
character and honesty of our brother, it becomes necessary for us to
investigate the matter, and report the same to our bretheren abroad;

Therefore,--

Resolved: That after hearing from the mouths of some that a suspicion
rested upon their minds relative to the conduct of our president as
regards his honesty and godly walk, we have investigated his whole
proceedings by calling upon those who accompanied him to and from
Missouri, and we are happy to have it in our power to way to our
brethren abroad, on and all, that we are satisfied with his conduct,
having learned from the clearest evidence, that he has acted in every
respect worthy of his high and responsible station in the Church, and
has prudently and cautiously preserved the good of this society at
large, and is worthy of our esteem and fellowship, and that those
reports could have originated in the minds of none except such as either
from a natural misunderstanding, or natural jealousy, are easily led to
conceive of evils where none exist."

It goes on from there, but that's the jist of what we need to start our
discussion. Put yourself in the position of these elders that were
called to hear the case. These elders that were listed at the beginning
of the excerpt were all good friends of Joe, and probably considered any
criminal allegations against him to be the work of the devil. Let's run
with a hypothetical for a minute here to try and bring it all to
reality. When I was talking to David, he speculated on the possibility
that Joe was getting a little frisky with one of the few women that were
involved in the march of Zion's camp. For the sake of argument, let's
take that for granted, and assume that the charges Sylvester brought up
against Joe were adultery charges; that fits the bill for the
allegations of dishonesty or an ungodly walk, and it's perfectly in line
with what Joe has done before, and would later do at a systematic level
in Nauvoo. I'll say at the onset, given the content of the court
proceedings, this doesn't seem very plausible, but we're merely granting
that Joe got a little frisky with one of the ten wormen in Zion's camp.

Picture yourself in the shoes of Sylvester during Zion's camp.
Everything has been absolute shit up to this point.... More like
everything had been a shit volcano exploding during a shit hurricane
confluencing with a shit tornado to make the perfect shit storm, but
that might be a little hyperbole.

You're hungry, and have been eating shit food for days, drinking water
that smells like shit, not bathing, probably covered in your own shit.
The Horses aren't eating their usual diet, and neither are you, so
everybody's shitting uncontrollably. You have to sleep on the horseshit
covered ground, fueling the fire with dried cowshit, which makes all the
little shitbirds and shitrabbits you cook taste like shit. The rain
won't stop turning the ground into shitmud that breaks the shitcovered
wagon wheels that bind up and break and shit. Everytime some shit goes
down in the camp, Joe hops on his high shithorse and gives a shitty
speach about how shitty your life is because of your sin. Have I painted
a shitty enough picture yet? No? Well... Everything that facilitated
this shitmilitia was all due to the shit Mormons were catching for not
wanting to own the ultimate unpaid shit-takers, aka slaves, and the
Mormons had their shit shot up because of the shitmob of shitty slave
owners in Missouri, but you don't own any slaves so you don't have a dog
in this shitfight. And all of this shit is leading up possibly the
biggest shitstorm firefight between battling shitarmies that don't wanna
be able to smell each other's shit. I would feel pretty shitty in this
situation if I were there, and understandably, you would too.

Maybe you get up in the middle of the night to take a violent shit, and
you happen to look over to the prophet's tent, and hear what sounds like
a horny bear mauling a $5 hooker. Suddenly the noise stops and 2 minutes
later, one of the ten women involved in Zion's camp emerges from the
tent with a shameful or devious look on her face. Of course, you don't
want to be seen, so you hide behind a tree to watch the scene play out,
and the woman straightens herself up, fixes her hair, and walks to the
tent where her husband and child are still fast asleep. 

What do you do in that situation? You could confront the prophet about
it, but you know he'll just deny deny deny, and find some way to weasel
out of the accusation. You could keep your mouth shut and take the
secret to the grave with you, but that doesn't do anybody any good.
What's your third option? Tell some of the other men in the camp that
aren't as gung ho to follow the prophet, or are doubting in the
slightest, and incite insurrection through the ranks, maybe your 20
closest friends on the march, or something. Well, we know that at one
point 20 people did break off from the march, only to rejoin upon the
realization that they would never make it back to Kirtland with their
limited supplies. We also know that Sylvester tried to charge Joe with
ungodly conduct once they returned to Kirtland, the details of which
we'll get into.

Now put yourself in Sylvester's shoes upon returning to Kirtland. You
known what happened, and you want other people to know about it, but the
only recourse for action is bringing the charges into a disciplinary
council that's chaired by Joe, his best friends, and closest colleagues.
It's like trying to file a complaint about the Hanford Nuclar site to
the executives and lawyers of the Hanford Nuclear center, to try and
bring criminal prosecution for the oil spill... and then BP holding
their own court proceedings in their own court with their own judge,
juried by stakeholders in the company... Sylvester was simply not going
to win this fight, and we see that in the statement released by the
presiding elders of the Church that we just read.

But Joe wouldn't take these allegations lying down, and had to react in
a familiar fashion. Just like Joe filed a complaint against Doctor
Philastus Hurlbut after Hurlbut filed his complaint against Joe, in
order to try and muddy the waters, Joe did the same thing with
Sylvester, and this is what we find in the History of the Church vol 2
starting on page 150.

"August 28, 1834. -- This day the High Council assembled according to
the direction of Bishop Whitney, to try Brother Sylvester Smith, charged
with a misdemeanor. The following is a copy of the complaint:--

Sir, I prefer the following charges against Sylvester Smith, a High
Priest of said Church:--

1<sup>st</sup>: He has refused to submit to the decision of a council of
the High Priests and Elders of this Church, held in this place on the
11<sup>th</sup> of this month, given in a case of difficulty between
said Sylvester Smith and Joseph Smith, Jun.

2<sup>nd</sup>: He continues to charge said Joseph Smith, contrary to
the decision of the before mentioned council, with improper conduct in
his proceedings as President of the Church of the Latter-day Saints,
during his journey the past season to the State of Missouri.

As these things are exceedingly grievous to many of the Saints in
Kirtland, and very prejudicial to the cause of truth in general, I
therefore require that you summon the High Council of this Church to
investigate this case, that a final decision may be had upon the same. I
say the High Council because it is a case affecting the Presidency of
said Church.

Sidney Rigdon"

I mean, did we expect Joe to act any other way? As soon as Joe was
charged for doing something unbecoming of a prophet of God, he would
manufacture allegations against the person that charged him in the first
place. It's a classic case of misdirection, and it fuckin worked because
the leadership of the church obviously sided with the infallible and
pious Joseph Smith, Jun.

In researching this dispute between Sylvester and Joe I started
transcribing the court documents into the show notes. But, in reading
further and further through the notes, I think it'll be advantageous to
just read the court proceedings in their entirety from the History of
the Church, also, these documents don't exist anywhere else other than
the History of the Church. Normally I won't read this much straight from
the church's own history, because it's good to go to other sources to
find concurring evidence, but this is the direct recounting of the court
minutes during the 7-day long court proceedings. Of course, I'll be
reading it straight through, but offering my own commentary as we chug
through it.

Vol 2 151-160

So, what can we learn from all of this.... (Vamp)

That takes us to the end of 1834. I know everybody is probably wondering
what happened in Kirtland with Hingepin Rigdon and Ollie, while Joe and
friends were on their perilous journey to Missouri and back, and so am
I\! In looking through the history, it seems like nothing notable
whatsoever happened, because I can't find any mention of activites
happening in Joe's absence. Of course, some things had to happen, but if
anything notable did, it was drastically overshadowed by the fight
between Joe and Sylvester upon their return to Kirtland. That's not to
say that certain things didn't happen in reaction to Sylvester's
dissent, because that's what we'll discuss next, but as for the time
when Joe was gone and Rigdon and Ollie were holding down the fort, it
seems like nothing worth recording made it into the historical records
that I'm researching.

Now that we understand how Joe reacted to allegations of not acting like
a prophet, we can see the repurcussions and the doubling down that Joe
did to ensure his place on the stand as president of the church.

First, we have to set the scene and understand what else was going on.
The newspaper "The Evening and Morning Star" was no longer in print
because the Independence printing press had been destroyed. To remedy
this problem, Joe established another printer, in Kirtland this time,
which printed the new church newspaper "The Messenger and Advocate". I
think he changed the name for the purpose of distancing the new paper
from the history the previous printer carried with it. If people started
seeing new editions of the same newspaper that had facilitated the
Missouri mob to chase the Mormons out of Jackson County, they might feel
a little skittish for fear of a similar fate in Kirtland. 

The persecution complex was really ramping up at this time, which was
not for lack of reason. I suppose calling it a persecution "complex"
isn't necessarily fitting, because it wasn't a complex. It was a harsh
reality that each and every Mormon had to deal with on a day-to-day
basis. The Mormons in Kirtland were relatively safe because of their
overwhelming majority population, but that was specific only to
Kirtland. Any Mormons living in towns outside of Kirtland were probably
being treated with the same vitriole that the Missouri Mormons were
dealing with, only to a slightly lesser degree.

It's worth pointing out that Missouri will be the primary epicenter of
contention in church history for a very long time. While the immediate
situation was remedied in Jackson county, the pressures that built up to
the march of Zion's camp were still a very strong force that the
Missouri Mormons were constantly dealing with. Those pressures don't
ever go away for the forseeable future, so bare that in mind as we lead
up to the Hauns Mill massacre in another couple of years. 

It's also worth pointing out that the Mormons in Kirtland weren't
completely safe, as they would very soon be chased out of their homes as
well, you know, another few years down the road. The Kirtland temple was
also in the middle of its very slow and arduous construction during this
time we're discussing. It took almost 3 whole years to complete
construction, and we'll talk about the dedication ceremony when that
comes up in 1836, because it's about as looney and delusional as a 3
dollar bill in a vat of iowaska. 

Let's close up 1834 and move into 1835. The last notable thing that
happened at the end of 1834 was the opening of a grammar school in
Kirtland, with William E. McLellin and Hingepin Rigdon as teachers. Now,
you might say, Rigdon as a grammar teacher, that seems absurd with
everything on his plate as Joe's second in command, but is it really? We
know that Rigdon was a bookworm, and loved the bible, perhaps moreso
than most other men, and certainly moreso than Joe, so why not engage in
teaching something he has a personal love for? Remember back to the time
in Hiram, Ohio; Joe and Rigdon were working together on writing their
own version of the bible, and revelation was given through one of them
in answer to the other asking questions about the bible. We even read
when they were going through the book of Revelation, it was this weird
Q\&A where Rigdon or Joe channelled god to help clarify the text or
something... very weird. The point is, Rigdon was exemplifying his
capacity and ability to teach the bible, and he obviously loved doing
it. Why else would he become a preacher in the first place? It really
does make sense that he was one of the teachers in this new school,
whether it was for grammar, or bible knowledge, he simply loved
teaching, and it's really not out of the ordinary to consider that
Rigdon was one of the primary teachers at this grammar school.

This is the passage where Joe mentions the establishment of this school.

"It was necessary to make preparations for the school of the Elders,
wherein they might be more perfectly instructed in the great things of
God, during the coming winter."

So it was basically the School of the Prophets 2.0, with a minor in
biblical studies. This is an excerpt from the February 1835 edition of
the Messenger and Advocate, where William E. McLellin describes the
school.

"Having been requested by the Trusties of the "Kirtland School," to give
a small sketch of the number of students who have attended this
institution, and of their progress in the different sciences, I
cheerfully comply with the request, having been an instructor therein
from its commencement in Dec. Last.

The School has been conducted under the immediate care and inspection of
Joseph Smith Jr., F.G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, O. Cowdery.

When the school first commenced, we received in to it both large and
small, but in about three weeks the classes became so large, and the
house so crowded, that it was thought advisable to dismiss all the small
students, and continue those only who wished to study the sciences of
penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar and geography. Before we
dismissed the small scholars, there were in all about 130 who attended.
Since that time there have been, upon an average, about 100, the most of
whom have received lectures upon English grammar; and for the last four
weeks about 70 have been studying geography one half the day, and
grammar and writing the other part.

T. Burdick's arithmetic, S. Kirkham's grammar and J. Olney's geography
have been used, with Webster's dictionary, as standard.

Since the year 1827 I have taught school in five different states, and I
have visited many school in which I was not engaged, as a teacher; but
in none, I can say with certainty, have I seen students make more rapid
progress, than in this. I expect myself to leave the institution, but
yet, I have a great desire to see it flourish. I therefore most
cheerfully recommend it to all those whose circumstances and situation
will allow them to attend, as being a place where strict attention is
paid to good morals as well as to the sciences.

W. E. McLellin"

Now why is this important? What we have is a veteran school teacher,
William E. McLellin endorsing the school that Joe, Rigdon, and Ollie had
created. This is as good a time as any to discuss McLellin and where he
fits into the timeline. William McLellin was an obsessive record keeper,
and kept very elaborate journals, both during his time in the church,
and well after he left the church. There are very few people in the
church history that have such a fascinating story as William McLellin,
and he'll be an integral person in a lot of research that happens after
the 1838 Defection day when the bank collapses. The thing is, a lot of
his work is quite controversial, even though he was in every sense of
the word a contemporary historian as the church was evolving throughout
the entirety of mid 1800's. 

To make this even more real, in the 1980's Mark Hoffman was buying and
selling old Mormon documents, while peppering in his own counterfeit
documents to spice up the history a little bit. The Salamander Letter
that I read on the very first episode of this show was penned by the
skilled hands of Mark Hoffman. Without going into much detail, he set up
one final deal that included a document crate full of letters and
journals from our one and only, William McLellin. Hoffman claimed that
he had volumes of McLellin's work, and it contained information that
was.... less than flattering about Joseph Smith and other early church
leaders. Understanding that he couldn't fabricate multiple volumes and
journals, Hoffman decided to kill two people to cover up his crimes. A
pipe bomb that he was about to use on somebody had a premature
detonation, which nearly killed Hoffman, and led to his arrest and
conviction. During the court proceedings, the court tried to subpeona
the McLellin collection that Hoffman claimed to have, and it was later
found out that the church unwittingly had the entirety of the McLellin
collection in their own archives the whole time. The finer details of
Hoffman's work is a story for another day, but hopefully we can
understand the gravity of the documents and research we're talking about
here, all collected and chronicled by McLellin.

Like I said, William McLellin will be an integral piece of our timeline,
and can't go without a proper name. What better to call a veteran school
teacher, and incessant researcher/chronicler than Professor Bill? Before
talking about that passage from the newspaper that Professor Bill wrote,
let's get him caught up in our storyline, because we need to know where
he came from. Professer Bill McLellin was born on January 18, 1806, less
than a month after Joe was born. He was living in Tennessee when Samuel
Smith and Reynolds Cahoon were preaching there in the summer of 1831. He
gave up whatever he was doing and followed them back to Kirtland, and
was baptized along the way. Very soon after the Professor was baptized,
he became ordained as an Elder in the church, and would assume various
leadership roles throughout his tenure in the church. He was an
important part of the negotiations between the Missourians, and the
Mormons living in Missouri, while Zion's camp was marching out. He
followed Joe back to Kirtland after Zion's camp was disbanded, and that
leads us to the point during which he wrote that passage, and was one of
the teachers in the School of the Elders. There is a wikipedia article
about him that has his picture. If I had to guess, it was probably taken
in the 1850's or maybe 60's, and this guy looks like the most
interesting man in the world after a 10 year alcholic binge where he
reaaaaly let himself go. His chinstrap beard has integrated with his big
bushy sideburns, and it all looks like a scraggly white rat's nest
that's eating his face. Although, I have to say... he has one of the
most suave looking David Beckham hairdos I've ever seen. 

So Professor Bill writes this incredibly positive endorsement of the
School of the Elders 3 months after it's organized. Apparently the
population of people wanting to attend became too much for the school to
handle, and they had to cull the little ones from its population. This
endorsement would seem unimportant if it weren't for the fact that 6
months after this, Professor Bill had some major disagreements about the
conduct going on inside the School. We'll get there in our timeline soon
enough, but we have a bit to cover before it happens, so it's important
to keep Professor Bill in the back of our minds for the next few
episodes. 

We'll come back to that issue of the Messenger and Advocate in a minute,
but before we do, we have to talk about the organization of the quorum
of the twelve apostles. There were pressures going on in the church that
required a strict organization of the leadership in the church, and this
was the answer Joe had. We'll talk about those pressures that lead up to
this in a minute.

This is taken from the History of the Church, vol 2 186-187

"A hymn was then sung, "Hark, listen to the trumpeters." President Hyrum
Smith prayed, and meeting was dismissed for one hour. 

Assembled pursuant to adjournment, and commenced with prayer.

President Joseph Smith, Jun., said that the first business of the
meeting was, for the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon to pray, each
one, and then proceed to choose twelve men from the Church, as Apostles,
to go to all nations,kindreds, tongues, and people. 

The Three Witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin
Harris united in prayer.

These Three Witnesses were then blessed by the laying on of the hands of
the Presidency.

The Witnesses then, according to a former commandment, proceeded to make
choice of the Twelve. Their names are as follows:

1.  1.  1.  Lyman E. Johnson
        2.  Brigham Young
        3.  Heber C. Kimball
        4.  Orson Hyde
        5.  David W. Patten
        6.  Luke S. Johnson
        7.  William E. McLellin
        8.  John F Boynton
        9.  Orson Pratt
        10. William Smith
        11. Thomas P. Marsh
        12. Parley P. Pratt"

Let's talk about the Book of Mormon for a minute. Follow me on this line
of logic to see if I'm crazy or not.

The Book of Mormon claims to be the third testament of Jesus Christ,
necessary for the building up of Zion the New Jerusalem on the American
Continent. Initially it was created for the purpose of uniting the
Lamanites, and bringing them to a knowledge of Jesus, but it also claims
to be a book for the purpose of getting somebody closer to god than any
other book. The Book of Mormon is the foundational text for the Mormon
church, and should therefore be the handbook of the Mormon religion. We
know that's obviously not the case because the Book of Covenants exists
to fill in the gaps that the Book of Mormon leaves, but the BoM does
talk about Jesus coming to the American continent to establish his
church among his believers. Obviously, having 12 apostles is one of the
main things Jesus is known for in the bible, and that maps to the
current LDS church, because they still have a quorum of 12 apostles.

The problem I have is it took 5 years after Joe's church was organized
for this to become one of the tenants of Mormonism. Furthermore, 12
apostles aren't mentioned in the Book of Mormon, and most importantly,
Jesus never established a church with 12 apostles on the American
continent in the Book of Mormon. 

Now, don't get me wrong, because in 3 Nephi 19 it describes Jesus
calling 12 disciples, and splitting up the multitude, for each of those
12 to teach, but it never calls them Apostles. Now, you could argue that
Apostle and disciple are interchangeable words, but not in the bible.
Anybody that believed in Jesus was a disciple, so Jesus' 12 apostles
were disciples of him, meaning they followed the discipline that Jesus
was the master of, but there's a distinction between the two. In the
bible, the Apostles were the special counsellors to Jesus, set apart
from the rest of the disciples that followed Jesus' discipline, but the
Book of Mormon only mentions disciples. What's more is the Book of
Mormon doesn't follow these 12 disciples around like Acts does, and it
doesn't talk much about them being the arbiters of Jesus' gospel after
he ascended to heaven, implying they were the ecclesiastical authority
of Jesus's church.

If the 12 apostles are the foundation of ecclesiastical authority in the
one true church, why did God allow Joe's one true Church of Christ to
operate for 5 years without that authority structure, and why isn't that
governing structure prescribed in the Book of Mormon? An apologist might
be tempted to say that God couldn't reveal the fullness of the gospel to
Joe all at once, it had to be doled out in small portions and
implemented piece by piece as situations necessitated more of the
gospel. My answer to that would be ARE YOU FUCKING KIDDING ME?\! There
have been countless situations in the early church that would have been
easier if there was some kind of hiearchy or governing body set up,
instead of just randomly appointing people to random tasks with
revelations specific to each person, which is what Joe had been doing up
to this point\! Who knows how much more successful the church would have
been if there were a single governing body to take care of problems that
were cropping up, or handling insurrections. Businesses tend to thrive
when there is a hierarchy or governing body set up with a CEO and his
closest officers being the people that carry out the will of the boss.
It took God 5 years of Joe's church running to adopt a very simple
business model that's proved successful for humans for thousands of
years.

If god was waiting until situations necessitated this one part of the
gospel to bring forward the practice of the quorum of the twelve, he was
about 2,628,000 minutes late with this revelation. 

You may also be thinking, I didn't remember hearing Ollie or Hingepin
Rigdon in that list, much less the three witnesses, Hyrum Smith, or
Sylvester Smith\! Well, of course Sylvester Smith wouldn't be in there,
but he would be made one of the presidents of the 70 at the next meeting
they held, but what about the other important people. Well, the Church
presidency was above this governing body of Twelve apostles, meaning
that we had President Joseph Smith, President Oliver Cowdery, President
Sidney Rigdon, and Patriarch Joseph Smith Sr. 

And as I said before, the very next meeting the leadership held, they
organized and called members to the quorum of the 70, to be a further
governing body at the lowest level, making them the high men on the
totem pole. Every single one of the men in the quorum of the 70 was a
member of Zion's camp, as were all the presidents of the quorum of the
70. 

Historians, believers and not, argue that this was the main purpose
behind the march of Zion's camp, basically testing the mettle of these
guys to see if they were worthy to be in a leadership position in the
church. D. Michael Quinn and Richard Bushman even claim this to be the
case in their coverage of Zion's camp, it was just a culling of those
with weak testimonies.

My argument merely stems from the fact that this organization of these
two major governing bodies could have been useful long before this in
countless situations, some of which we've covered. I figured this out,
and I'm just a guy. It shouldn't have taken an omnipotent god 5 years of
chaos to figure out how to run the one true goddamn church, right?\!
Maybe I'm just ignorant and God works in mysterious ways... mysterious
and ineffective...

Soon after this time in the church history, Joe brings forward his big
revelation on the Melchisedek Priesthood, and sets it apart from the
Aaronic priesthood, which was an even bigger point of organizational
authority that would have come in handy before this, but alas, it still
took 5 years for God to bring this revelation forward. We'll talk about
that next episode.

There was something else that I wanted to talk about, which will take us
to the end of the historical portion of today's episode. It's something
from that same February 1835 issue of the Messenger and Advocate that we
read from earlier, and it concerns a version of the first vision account
that Joe supposedly experienced. Up to this point, we've talked a couple
of times about the first vision story, and some of the problems in it.
The biggest problem with the first vision account is, of course, the
fact that it was printed 10 years after it supposedly happened, being
printed in 1832, talking about Joe seeing the heavens open up and being
forgiven of his sins in 1822. This is just scratching the surface when
it comes to the historicity of Joe seeing angels before 1830. A few
episodes ago we read the entirety of that 1832 history that Joe
dictated, so we won't discuss it now, but what we are going to talk
about is the 1835 first vision account.

As the story goes for TBM's today, at the age of 14, Joseph Smith went
and prayed in the sacred grove, and god and Jesus appeared to him,
telling him that all the religions were wrong, and their professors
corrupt. In 1823, the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph and told him where
to find the plates, and 4 years later, Joseph was able to unearth them
and translate the Egyptian writings into the Book of Mormon. I know most
people listening are probably like.. uugh... yes, we know the story from
the Mormon perspective, stop harping on it; but it's very important to
understand for what we're about to read.

In the same February 1835 issue of the Messenger and Advocate that had
that blurb by Professor Bill about the School of the Elders, our good
friend Ollie Cowdung printed an official history of Joseph's first
vision. Let's read it to see if we can parse out some details. By the
way, there will be a link to this in the show notes just in case you
want to read a pdf of a photocopy of this newspaper article for
yourself, and it's taken from the BYU online archive website.

There is a lot of preacher talk in the letter, so I'm going to skip over
those parts, because we're only interested in the historical recounting
of Joe's vision here.

"You will recollect that I mentioned the time of a religious excitement,
in Palmyra and vicinity to have been in the 15<sup>th</sup> year of our
brother J. Smith Jr's, age—that was an error in the type—it should have
been in the 17<sup>th</sup>.-- You will please remember this correction,
as it will be necessary for the full understanding of what will follow
in time. This would bring the date down to the year 1823.

I do not deem it necessary to write further on the subject of this
excitement. It is doubted by many whether any real or essential good
ever resulted from such excitements, while others advocate their
propriety with warmth.

The mind is easily called up to reflection upon a matter of such deep
importance, and it is just that it should be; but there is a regret
occupying the heart when we consider the deep anxiety of thousands, who
are lead away with a vain imagination, or groundless hope, no better
than the idle wind or the spider's web.

But if others were not benefited, our brother was urged forward and
strengthened in the determination to know for himself of the certainty
and reality of pure and holy religion. -- And it is only necessary for
me to say, that while this excitement continued, he continued to call
upon the Lord in secret for a full manifestation of divine approbation,
and for, to him, the all important information, if a Supreme being did
exist, to have an assurance that he was accepted of him. This, most
assuredly, was correct-- it was right. . .

But to proceed with my narrative.--

On the evening of the 21<sup>st</sup> of September, 1823, previous to
retiring to rest, our brother's mind was unusually wrought upon the
subject which had so long agitated his mind—his heart was drawn out in
fervent prayer, and his whole soul was so lost to every thing of a
temporal nature, that earth, to him, had lost its charms, and all he
desired was to be prepared in heart to commune with some kind messenger
who could communicate to him the desired information of his acceptance
with God.

At length the family retired, and he, as usual, bent his way, though in
silence, where others might have rested their weary frames "locked fast
in sleep's embrace;" but repose had fled, and accustomed slumber had
spread her refreshing hand over others beside him—he continued still to
pray—his heart, though once hard and obdurate, was softened, and that
mind which had often flitted, like the "wild bird of passage," had
settled upon a determined basis not to be decoyed or driven from its
purpose.

In this situation hours passed unnumbered—how many or how few I know
not, neither is he able to inform me; but supposes it must have been
eleven or twelve, and perhaps later, as the noise and bustle of the
family, in retireing, had long since ceased.-- While continuing in
prayer for a manifestation in some way that his sins were forgiven;
endeavoring to exercise faith in the scriptures, on a sudden a light
like that of day, only of a purer and far more glorious apparance and
brightness, burst into the room.-- Indeed, to use his own description,
the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming and
unquenchable fire. This sudden appearance of a light so bright, as must
naturally be expected, occasioned a shock or sensation, visible to the
extremities of the body. It was, however, followed with a calmness and
serenity of mind, and an overwhelming rapture of joy that surpassed
understanding, and in a moment a personage stood before him.

Notwithstanding the room was previously filled with light above the
brightness of the sun, as I have before described, yet there seemed to
be an additional glory surrounding or accompanying this personage, which
shone with an increased degree of brilliancy, of which he was in the
midst; and though his countenance was as lightening, yet it was of a
pleasing, innocent and glorious appearance, so much so, that every fear
was banished from the heart, and nothing but calmness pervaded the soul.
. .

But it may be well to relate the particulars as far as given—The stature
of this personage was a little above the common size of men in this age;
his garment was perfectly white, and had the appearance of being without
seam.

Though fear was banished from his heart, yet his surprise was no less
when he heard him declare himself to be a messenger sent by commandment
of the Lord, to deliver a special message, and to witness to him that
his sins were forgiven, and that his prayers were heard; and that the
scriptures might be fulfilled, which say--...

He then proceeded and gave a general account of the promises made to the
fathers, and also gave a history of the aborigines of this country, and
said they were literal descendants of Abraham. He represented them as
once being an enlightened and intelligent people, possessing a correct
knowledge of the gospel, and the plan of restoration and redemption. He
said this history was written and deposited not far from that place, and
that it was our brother's privilege, if obedient to the commandments of
the Lord, to obtain, and translate the same by the means of the Urim and
Thummim, which were deposited for that purpose with the record.

"Yet," said he, "the scripture must be fulfilled before it is
translated, which says that the words of a book which were sealed, were
presented to the learned; for thus has God determined to leave men
without excuse, and show to the meek that his arm is not shortened that
it cannot save."

A part of the book was sealed, and was not to be opened yet. The Sealed
part, said he, contains the same revelation which was given to John upon
the isle of Patmos, and when the people of the Lord are prepared, and
found worthy, then it wil be unfolded unto them.

On the subject of bringing to light the unsealed part of this record, it
may be proper to say, that our brother was expressly informed, that it
must be done with an eye single to the glory of God; if this
consideration did not wholly characterize all his proceedings in
relation to it, the adversary of truth would overcome him, or at least
prevent his making that proficiency in this glorious work which he
otherwise would.

While describing the place where the record was deposited, he gave a
minute relation of it, and the vision of his mind being opened at the
same time, he was permitted to view it critically; and previously being
acquainted with the place, he was able to follow the direction of the
vision, afterward, according to the voice of the angel, and obtain the
book. 

I close for the present by subscribing myself as ever, your brother in
Christ.

Oliver Cowdery."

I know that was a long reading, but there is an overall point that I'm
trying to get at. Did anybody notice anything peculiar in this account? 

The third paragraph we read started with this line "The mind is easily
called up to reflection upon a matter of such deep importance," as well
it should. When somebody has a life changing experience, like seeing
angels or god, that experience tends to stick with them. I was having a
discussion with a TBM a while back, and when it came down to why he
believes, he said he had a ministering of angels while his kid was sick
in the hospital. Of course, I probably should have asked him what he
meant without sounding incredulous, because he shut down and didn't
offer any details beyond that, but it was apparently an occurence that
stuck with him enough to unfalteringly solidify his own personal faith
in the church. 

When Joe had this angellic visitation in 1823, I can only imagine that
it was a truly monumental occasion for him, but let's talk in detail
about the paragraph preceding this vision in 1823.

"But if others were not benefited, our brother was urged forward and
strengthened in the determination to know for himself of the certainty
and reality of pure and holy religion. -- And it is only necessary for
me to say, that while this excitement continued, he continued to call
upon the Lord in secret for a full manifestation of divine approbation,
and for, to him, the all important information, if a Supreme being did
exist, to have an assurance that he was accepted of him. This, most
assuredly, was correct-- it was right. . .

But to proceed with my narrative.--

On the evening of the 21<sup>st</sup> of September, 1823, previous to
retiring to rest, our brother's mind was unusually wrought upon the
subject which had so long agitated his mind—his heart was drawn out in
fervent prayer, and his whole soul was so lost to every thing of a
temporal nature, that earth, to him, had lost its charms, and all he
desired was to be prepared in heart to commune with some kind messenger
who could communicate to him the desired information of his acceptance
with God."

Let me get this straight, in 1823, Joe was struggling with the question
of God existing? According to the current narrative, this was 3 years
AFTER Joe had the sacred grove visitation of God and Jesus in separate
bodies, floating above him, and yet in 1823 he's somehow questioning if
God exists?\!?\! How the fuck does that work?\! And please, don't
retreat to saying, well this was written by Oliver Cowdery, not Smith
himself, because do you really think that Joe would let this history be
published in the church newspaper without being the final say on what
goes into the passage? 

And to go beyond that, this account of the 1823 visitation is immensely
detailed, but altogether neglects mentioning the appearance in 1820 of
fucking GOOOOD\! Was this visitation of an unnammed angel really that
much more exciting than seeing GOD\!?\!? So much more exciting that the
appearance of God didn't even merit a mention or elusion to?\! 

To go even deeper, the 1832 account said that in 1822, Joe was in the
wilderness crying to god and the heavens opened up, and the Lord said
his sins are forgiven, and to go his way and sin no more. GOD personally
told Joe that he was forgiven of his sins and accepted, yet in 1823, a
year later, Joe is praying to be forgiven of his sins, and be given a
sign that God exists?\! Did he not take God's word for it when God said
that his sins were forgiven a year before?\!

But the problems go even deeper than that\! The angel that appeared in
1823 is completely unnammed. In the 1832 account, it merely states that
the record was engraven by Maroni, spelled with an A, but speaks about
it in the third person, never claiming to be Moroni. 

If we spelunk even further down this rabbit hole, we find that most of
the earliest versions of the 1823 visitation call the angel Nephi, not
Moroni. Even Joe's own mother in the original publication of her book
Autobiographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, claims the angel was named
Nephi. Multiple newspaper publications, that Joe was at the head of,
printed articles claiming the angel to be Nephi, up to two years before
Joe's death, and he never published a correction or retraction for those
articles. 

Some may claim that it was a typo that was later corrected, but if that
were the case it would read Morino, or Muroni or something, mistaking
the main character is not a typo. It would be like George R.R. Martin
saying in an interview that Cerci Lannister as mother of the dragons
entombed the dragons in the dungeon of the city, it just wouldn't happen
if the visitation happened the way Joe claimed.

It's only after Joe's death that any mentions of it being Nephi were
changed to Moroni. In the current version of Lucy's book,
Autobiographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, it says Moroni, but that's
only because Bloody fucking Brigham went on a propaganda campaign and
required all known copies to be collected and burned, and for a new
proprietary version to be published under the same title, the epitomy of
revisionist history. Joseph's own mother called the angel Nephi until
her dying breath, and it was only changed later to fit Bloody Brigham's
narrative. Joseph's own 1842 history called the angel Moroni, and it was
only after Bloody Brigham obsessively eradicated all known documents to
make his own version of the history fit his own narrative, that the
angel was consistently called Moroni. By the way, just a small aside
here, I found out recently that the current History of the Church
differs from Joseph's original 1842 history of the church by 62,000
words. Yes, 62,000 words have been altogether added or deleted from
Joe's own dictated history, and it's still claimed to be his one true
history... I don't know how to quantify that, but 62,000 words is more
than 20% of the words in the Book of Mormon's 500+ pages. This 13 page
document that I'm reading from right now has less than 11,000 words. If
you were to take all the words that were added or subtracted from Joe's
6 volume history of the church at the hand of Bloody Brigham, you could
fill a small book with them. If that isn't revisionist history.... I
don't know what else to call it. So anytime that I read out of the
History of the Church and say something like "take it for what it's
worth," I really mean it, because who knows how much is changed from the
original version.

The problems with the historicity of the first vision account are truly
endless. There are currently 9 different known version of the first
vision account, and they all differ on some minor points, and a few of
them are wildly different from others on major points. When historians
are trying to determine historical accuracy of any given event,
everything I just ranted about are exact symptoms of a large scale
obfuscation, or wholesale fabrication of the event, and that is a HUUUGE
problem when determining the truthfulness of this one true prophet of
God.

I'm probably starting to sound like a broken record at this point, but
I'm an history nerd, not an actual historian. I was never taught the
proper tools for parsing out historical truths from multiple differing
historical accounts. I was spoonfed shitty history from shitty
historical sources. Don't think I'm holding the Mormon church alone
responsible for this blind spot in my education, because it's a
systematic problem with education in general at this point. 

The problem stems from where we get our history. So many history books,
public education textbooks especially, are guilty of only giving one
side, or ommitting some details of historical events. 

I'm a frequenter of reddit, and there was a great ELI5 on there with a
question along the lines of "I was taught about Thomas Edison in history
class, and taught about the difference between AC and DC in science
class, but I don't remember learning anything about Nikola Tesla. Why is
that?"

The best answer I could find in the comments section was the top reply
to it, citing the fact that Edison was an industrialist, while Tesla was
a much lesser known inventor. It's hard to explain the concepts of
Tesla's inventions to grade school children, while it's easy to explain
the inventor of the light bulb, so Edison is discussed more in history
class.

While this answer was good, I feel like it was lacking in so many
respects. While Thomas Edison is revered on the level of most of the
founding fathers, Nikola Tesla, who was arguably a better inventor,
barely merits a mention in most history books, and I think that's
primarily due to the smear campaign that Edison waged against Tesla.
Obviously, Tesla's AC was a better technology than Edison's DC, and the
majority of powered things today run on AC because it's so easy to
transform to higher and lower voltages, travels distances with much
lower impedence, and is inherently less dangerous. 

But this smear campaign is all but ignored in the annals of history. We
don't talk about the fact that the first electric chair victim was done
as a stunt by Edison to prove that AC is more dangerous than DC. Edison
pumped this guy full of AC for over a minute straight with a massive
crowd of curious onlookers, while the man screamed in agony and lit on
fire before finally dying. The harsh reality is, if Edison would have
used his own DC to do the job, the man would have been dead in a matter
of seconds, and wouldn't have spent more than a minute screaming and
wailing, and upsetting the onlookers, thus inciting fear of Tesla's
technology. The scene was reportedly so horrible that men and women were
fainting and even vommitting from the sight of a fellow human being
enduring such torture.

I believe Edison even electrocuted an elephant to further illustrate the
point, but my memory could be falsly conflating another story in that
respect. The point I'm getting at here is the fact that Edison was a
monster, with great showmanship, and sales tactics, while Tesla was a
much more noble man, perpetually reinvesting any money he had into newer
inventions, and died virtually penniless. His impact on the world of
electrical innovation is vastly under represented in most public
education history books.

Of course, none of that information was made readily available to me
while in school learning about electricity and inventors from a century
ago. The information was there, and I could have looked it up on the
internet, but the history textbooks I read in school make no mention of
this horrible smear campaign, because it might severely damage how
people view Thomas Edison today. That's why he's held up on a pedestal
similar to the founding fathers, even though he wasn't one, because he
was the most successful inventor of his time, even though Tesla was
obviously much more prolific and inventive than Edison. We've even found
Tesla's blueprints for wireless technology\! Tesla deserves to be
revered, and possibly even exalted above Edison, if not for his superior
inventive powers, than just for being a better person in general, and I
think this gets at the heart of my frustration.

When we hold these historical individuals with such high reverence, the
picture of that person in our mind ceases to hold any semblence to the
people behind these cardboard cutouts, and very few historical
individuals have been victim of this revisionist history moreso than
Joseph Smith. 

The Joseph Smith that Mormons believe in today is nothing like the real
Joe. This portrait of a holy and pious, nearly infallible, man that
Mormons think their religion to be spawned by, holds almost no
connection to the Joe that's portrayed in the real historical documents.
That version of the first vision account that we just read was published
in February of 1835, and it's worth noting the other things going on in
church history at that time. Only 3 months prior to this being
published, Eber Howe's Mormonism Unvailed was published, and by the time
this account was published, Mormonism Unvailed was hitting record sales
numbers. In the same February of 1835 publication that this article was
printed in, the cover page article even mentions How's book, so
obviously it was making the rounds and devout Mormons were asking some
tough questions that Joe and Rigdon didn't want to answer.

Like in the case with Edison, when Tesla came along, it threatened
Edison's standing, and he engaged in whatever was necessary to keep him
at the forefront of the burgeoning technology of electricity. Joe did
the same thing. When Mormonism Unvailed came along, it posed a true
existential threat to Joe and Co., and thus we see the reaction to this
threat in Joe's propaganda campaign, that forever shaped how Mormons
view Joseph Smith for the rest of history.

I'm not bothered by the fact that this conjectural information about
Joseph Smith wasn't presented to me on a silver platter. I'm not even
bothered by the fact that my perspective of Joe becomes broader and more
complete with each and every document I read about him, in fact I love
that about studying Mormon history. I'm bothered by the fact that I had
to dig this fucking deep to even be aware of this highly conjectural
part of Joe's history, that poses a real threat to his claims of divine
authority, which lie at the foundation of Mormonism. 

You wanna know the dumbest part of it all? I'm probably going to receive
in an email or two about that little story with Edison and Tesla from
somebody that holds some personal reverence for Edison, pissed off about
me dragging his name through the mud, which only furthers my point that
revisionist history is a systematic problem that pervades even the most
comprehensible recounting of an historical event or person. 

The Joseph Smith that Mormon's know and love today is an ultimate
example of what revisionist history can do to a person. We're lucky that
we have so much documented history surrounding Joe so we can try to
understand the real man behind the cardboard cutout that's portrayed in
the church's own history. Luckily, we can see the historical revising
that Joe was doing to try and make himself out to be an unflappable holy
and pious prophet. We can see Joe's own revisionist history juxtaposed
to other documents, and see where they come into contradiction with so
many other historical accounts of him. 

I suppose, all of that points to the overall goal of doing all this
research. I'm a lover of truth, and when somebody alters that for their
own gain, I take it as a personal assault on my intellect, and a crime
against the overall wealth of human knowledge, which is truly
inexusable. The LDS church could act more like the Community of Christ,
also known as the reorganized reorganized LDS church. They embrace the
history of Ol' Joe Smith, and only hold the Book of Mormon up as a
19<sup>th</sup> century work concerning 19<sup>th</sup> century
burned-over district Christianity. They accept gays, they have women in
all leadership roles in the church, I believe they gave blacks the
priesthood in like the 50's or something, and they don't judge or
discriminate the way the SLC LDS church does at a systematic level. This
is incontrovertable proof that the LDS church could survive if they were
to abandon their indefensible positions about Joe and the history of the
church, much less their bigotry on gays, women and anybody with the Mark
of Cain. But, as Chuck said in last weeks episode, they're never going
to embrace these changes willingly; it'll take an act of asset seizing,
or political pressure before they give even one inch of the battleground
to their adversary. We need to be that adversary, and hold their feet to
the fire on their bigotted and discriminatory ways, and force the church
to embrace the 21<sup>st</sup> century with the rest of the civilized
fucking world. 

I'm reminded of a Voltaire quote I heard on the founding fathers
Irreligiosophy episodes and it sums up the Mormon church so well.

"Every sensible man, every honest man, must hold the Christian sect in
horror. But what shall we substitute in it's place? you say. What? A
ferocious animal has sucked the blood of my relatives. I tell you to rid
yourselves of this beast, and you ask me what you shall put in it's
place?"

Yes the church has sucked the blood of my relatives, but not only that.
The more I dig into the history, and the more I learn about the church,
the more I realize that every single person associated with the church
throughout it's entire history has been a victim of this vampiric death
cult, and I can't stand idly by. It's not just the blood of my
relatives, it's the blood of my friends, it's my blood, it's the blood
of every gay teenager that's kicked out of their home because they're
full of sin. It's the blood of 120 dead men women and children in a
meadow in southern Utah. It's the blood of the prophets that Bloody
Brigham swore to avenge upon the earth to the third and fourth
generation. It's the very blood of our shared humanity that's been drawn
in such small doses, that no person notices until they're too weak stand
on their own goddamn feet and fight back.

Let us stand together and say with one collective voice, I'm not going
to be your life force anymore\! I'm not going to have my blood sucked by
a ferocious ravenous animal, and I'm going to fight to take my life
back\! We owe it to ourselves\! We owe it to our loved ones and friends
and neighbors to fight back\! The church won't survive if we stand up
and say I'm madder than hell, and you can't take my life away from me\! 

Until that day, until we stand together opposed to the Mormon cult, the
church will never relinquish these vestigial tenants of hateful bigotry
and historical lies. We must fight the church with the same intolerance
that constructs their stark white granite facade of holiness. We owe it
to the collective intelligence of the human race to either drastically
alter the Mormon religion, or wipe it off the face of the fucking
planet.

Bonus:

"The Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, is edited by Oliver
Cowdery, and published every month at Kirtland, Ohio by F. G. Williams &
Co.

At $1 per an in advance. Every person prcuring ten new subscribers, and
forwarding $10, current money, shall be entitled to a paper one year,
gratis. All letters to the Editor, or Publishers must be POST PAID. No
subscription will be received for a less term than one year, and no
paper discontinued till all arrearages are paid, except at the option of
the publishers."
