---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 34 - Kirtland Temple Hallucication'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-34-kirtland-temple-hallucication/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-34-kirtland-temple-hallucication
category: History
date: 2016-06-10 05:44:54 +0000
---

Ep 34 -- Kirtland Temple Hallucication

On this episode, we start off with a discussion about the history of
Mormon temples. This launches us into a discussion about the resources
necessary to build such a structure, as well as how they paid for by the
church. After that we discuss 6 pages in the History of the Church that
sound balls to the walls crazy, I wonder what was in that anointing oil.
This leads us into a question about a bigger Mormon history issue, is
there a naturalistic explanation for the miraculous angel and dead
prophet sightings of the Kirtland Temple dedication ceremony? The
episode concludes with a discussion about Ollie and Joe's friendship, as
well as the overarching problem with Mormon Temples.

Show links:\
\
Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com\
\
Twitter \@NakedMormonism\
\
Facebook https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311\
\
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism\
\
Outro music Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/\
\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>

Links:

The Spirit of God -- Mormon Tabernacle Choir

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=608cbv7Qe_A>

LDS Last Days Missouri Temple plat

<http://www.ldslastdays.com/default.aspx?page=talk_newjerusalem.htm>

LDS History article on Kirtland Temple dedication

<https://history.lds.org/article/historic-sites-ohio-kirtland-temple-kirtland?lang=eng>

Mormonthink article on Kirtland Temple dedication

<http://www.mormonthink.com/glossary/kirtlandtemplededication.htm>

Jeremy Runnells excommunication video

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xNNfujkWFZI>

Monster on Sunday -- atheist metal

<http://monsteronsunday.com/>

Tristan's project -- Where Babies Come From

<https://www.reverbnation.com/wherebabiescomefrom/songs>

Welcome to episode 34 of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, the serial Mormon
history podcast. Today is June 9^th^, 2016, my name is Bryce Blankenagel
and thank you for joining me.

We just have time for a quick recap of last historical timeline episode
before jumping into the meat of today's episode. We started out with
talking about ancient archaeological digs that were unearthing all kinds
of great artifacts from antiquity, only to be shipped all over the world
and sold to private collectors, like Joe. Eventually, a guy named
Michael Chandler sold 4 mummies and some Papyri to the church, and Joe
would later manufacture parts of the Pearl of Great Price from this
Papyri, after translating it and determining the Egyptian alphabet.
After that, our good friend Oliver Cowdery presented the 1835 version of
the Doctrine and Covenants to the presidency, which was voted on and
adopted into the official church canon by the presidency, and eventually
the entire church.

After talking about Ollie Cowdung's magnus opus, we discussed the fact
that Joseph Smith Sr., or as we know him Big Daddy Cheese, was called to
be the church Patriarch, and given a living stipend plus fees for
providing patriarchal blessings to the saints. We then moved on to
talking about ANOTHER first vision account that was taken from Joe's own
journal, and of course, there were discrepancies between it and the
current version featured in the 1842 History of the Church.

After that, we advanced the storyline to one of the biggest events in
Mormon history up to this point, and that was the first provable
sex-scandal between Joe and Fanny Alger. There has been fleeting
evidence of Joe thinking with his dipstick up to this point, but this
occurrence between 1834?-1836 was the first one we have solid evidence
for, and know the affair to be a sticking point with a lot of the
leadership in the church, Joe pissed a lot of people off by porkin
Fanny. This affair will serve to create a lot of problems between Joe
and his closest allies for the 8 remaining years of Joe's life.

We finished out last historical episode talking about a man named
Abraham Palmer, who joined the church in late 1835, or early 1836, which
marks the commemoration of 180 years since my family line entered the
Mormon historical timeline. I also read my own patriarchal blessing for
anybody that supports the show through patreon.com/nakedmormonism.

That'll do for a roundup, let's jump straight into the meat of today's
episode. While it may seem like we cover a lot of ground, we're going to
focus most of today's episode on basically a week and a half of time in
the church's history. The time frame we're focusing on is from March 26,
to April 6, 1836. The main event we'll be talking about today is known
as one of the most miraculous and amazing events in all of Mormon
history. We have a lot of first-person accounts from this time period,
and it was well known and publicized in Mormon periodicals and personal
journals.

I have to set everybody up for what we'll be discussing today, because
we need context. I could describe that week and a half period, and you
may think it amazing or acid-trippy, but with some proper context, I
think it'll be much more impressive to understand the gravity of today's
show. We'll start out with talking about a revelation from late 1832 to
introduce our topic and set the scene for this week and a half we're
leading up to.

This is taken from the website of JosephSmithPapers.org, which is the
church's own book series that publishes volumes of early Mormon
documents that they have hidden in the catacombs of the LDS document
archive. They have digitalized versions openly available on
josephsmithpapers.org, where you can see photocopies of the original
documents, as well as the expertly catalogued printed version of each
page. This is a small excerpt from a revelation Joe gave that would
later become D&C 88.

"Therefore verily, I say unto you  my friends, call your [solemn
assembly](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/?target=x2960#30321247157587525),
as I have  commanded you, and as all have not faith, seek ye diligently,
and teach one another, words of  wisdom, yea seek ye out of the best
books, words  of wisdom, seek Learning even by study, and also,  by
faith organize yourselves, prepare evry needful \[thing?\] and
establish, an house, even an house of prayer and house of fasting, an
house of faith, an house of Learning, an house of glory, an house of
order an [house of
God](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/?target=x2960#1624881194351354715),
that your incomings may be in the name of the Lord, and your
outgoing may be in the name of the Lord, that all your salutations, may
be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands, unto the most
high\[.\]"

This is the first real mention of Joe commanding a house of the lord to
be built. It could be argued that it was interpreted as simply a church
building, but they already had a couple of those by the time this
revelation came along in December of 1832, so this revelation is,
indeed, commanding the readers of the revelation to construct a temple.

Oddly enough, Joe had already mentioned that a house of the lord would
be built in Zion, the New Jerusalem. Well, not Joe particularly, but
Ollie did in a letter dated Oct. 17, 1830, right before he left with
Peter Whitmer, P-Cubed, and Dick Zyban Peterson to go on the church's
first official mission to the land of the Lamanites. This was the same
mission that reportedly brought Hingepin Sidney Rigdon into the church;
for more details on it, listen to episode 24, Joe's New Sidekick.
Anyway, in this letter that Ollie wrote, he says this, starting from the
beginning of the letter.

"I, [Oliver
\[Cowdery\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/?target=x1517#15050247888749437749),
being commanded of the Lord God, to go forth unto
the [Lamanites](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/?target=x1517#5042206869136521857),
to proclaim glad tidings of great joy unto them, by presenting unto them
the fulness of the Gospel, of the only begotten son of God;  and also,
to rear up a pillar as a witness where the Temple of God shall be built,
in the
glorious [New-Jerusalem](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/?target=x1517#4898778934142910709);"

Building a proper temple was on Joe's mind from the beginning of the
church. I don't properly understand the specific appeal of building a
temple. I mean, I get that Solomon's temple was highly revered in the
Old Testament, and the Tabernacle of Moses was focused on almost as much
as the ark of the covenant was throughout the Pentateuch, but I just
don't personally understand the allure of a great and spacious building
like that.

But, that's not to say that a temple, or big house isn't for everyone,
and I think that was the vision that Joe had for his church. There were
a couple of small buildings they used as gathering places, or churches,
but no major temple to legitimize the church, and fulfill revelation
from the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Joe's own head.

If we remember back to episode 25, Joe in Charge, we know that once the
revelation/commandment was given to the missionary force to build a
temple in Zion, Joe had to make his own trip out to Independence,
Missouri, in order to give the revelation about where the temple would
be constructed. Once he arrived in Missouri, he gave a revelation on
exactly where the temple would be constructed, and laid a makeshift
cornerstone on the plot. This was one of the earliest reasons why the
Missourians hated the Mormons, because Joe just came strollin in like
king badass, and said this is where the temple will be, and all you
slave owning country bumpkin redneck Missourians can just fuckin deal
with it. You can imagine how that might make the Missourians a little
uneasy having this yankee sumbitch come in and declare their town to be
Zion where the Mormon Jesus would return.

It was less than a year after this that Joe gave his revelation on the
temple being built in Kirtland that we read earlier. It's clear that
Joe's understanding of the word "Temple" was ever-changing and could
mean pretty much any building the church needed for any stuffs at all.

In June 1833, Joe sent the leaders of the church in Missouri plans that
called for 24 temples to be built in the center of Independence,
Missouri. This is taken from LDSlastdays.com, and there it even includes
a picture of the original plat that Joe drew out for Missouri, courtesy
of LDS archives. There will be a link to this article in the show notes
so you can see Joe's grand plans for Independence in his own writing,
which never really panned out.

"At the center of the mile-square city, he envisioned two large blocks
containing 24 sacred \"temples.\" These were to be assigned to the
various priesthood quorums and were to serve a variety of functions. The
Prophet anticipated that the city would have a population of from 15,000
to 20,000 so that these 24 buildings would be needed as \"houses of
worship, schools, etc.\" Because all inhabitants of the city should be
living on a celestial level (D&C 105:5) all these structures could
properly be regarded as \"temples\"-places of communication between
heaven and earth-even though their functions were not restricted to
ordinance work."

As we can see, Joe's comprehension of the word temple began to expand to
include pretty much any building that the church needed for any purpose
whatsoever. During this time that Joe was envisioning temples from Oct
1830 to mid-1834, He didn't see one massive white-façade building that
we see as temples today, he just planned on calling any building, used
for church purposes, a temple. There is even a breakdown, in the same
article, of the function of each building labeled in Joe's plat for
Zion, listing everything from House for the Deacons, to a Sacred
Apostolic Repository. It really is fascinating stuff, and this article
really tells a lot more that we can't get into right now, so please be
sure to check out the LDSlastdays.com article in the show notes for
further reading. It should be noted that Joe made a prophecy that there
would be a temple built in Independence, and laid two cornerstones for
it when he was there in 1831. This prophecy has yet to be fulfilled.
There has never been a temple built where Joe gave the prophecy and laid
the cornerstones. Today the plot is owned by the Church of Christ, and
they dug up the cornerstones in the early 1900's and have yet to fulfill
Joe's ultimate prophecy. Maybe they're hoping that Jesus will come back
and drop a fuckin temple out of the sky or something, who knows... But
to this day, it remains an empty lot with a little visitor's center on
it.

Moving away from Missouri and back to Ohio, Joe had revealed that
Kirtland would be the site of a huge temple in 1832, and the plot was
dedicated soon afterwards. It took Joe and company a bit of time to get
started because Joe was busy with a lot of other projects coming down
the pike. The printing press had just been established in Missouri and
the Book of Commandments were being printed. Persecution in Missouri was
beginning to become a real problem. People were constantly joining the
church, or apostatizing and falling away while trying to pull as many of
their friends out of the faith with them as they could. Joe was trying
not to run the bishop's storehouse into the ground, while at the same
time not letting the United Order become financially insolvent. The
School of the Elders was amidst collapse, and Doctor Philastus Hurlbut
had just been excommunicated, and was beginning his anti-Mormon campaign
to smear/expose Joe for the fraud he was. There were a lot of things
going on in 1833 that held up the actual construction of the Kirtland
temple, so on June 1, 1833, Joe gave this revelation taken from the 1835
D&C section 95.

"1 Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, whom I love, and whom I love I
also chasten, that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement
I prepare a way for their deliverance, in all things out of
temptation: and I have loved you:\
Wherefore ye must needs be chastened, and stand rebuked before my face,\
for ye have sinned against me a very grevious sin, in that ye have not
considered the great commandment in all things, that I have given unto
you, concerning the building of mine house,\
for the preparation wherewith I design to prepare mine apostles to prune
my vineyard for the last time, that I may bring to pass my strange act,
that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh."

The lord had to chastise Joe and friends for not getting to work quickly
enough on constructing the temple in Kirtland. This is a side note, but
you would think the almighty god could express his frustration with the
temple by means other than saying "whom I love\[,\] I also chasten, that
their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way
for their deliverance, in all things out of temptation: and I have loved
you". I mean, when the conference center in SLC was under construction
in 1999, there was a freak tornado that blew through the center of
downtown SLC, causing \$170 million in damage. This tornado was
extremely rare, and coincidentally almost directly hit the conference
center, causing a fair amount of damage, and picking up the construction
cranes and throwing them around like toothpicks. A couple of the cranes
almost toppled onto the SLC temple, but alas, that massive granite
bastard didn't even get a scratch.

My point is, if God were displeased with the progress of one of his
buildings, he had means to inform the people with a sign of some sort.
He could have brought in a massive flood that coincidentally dug a huge
hole right on the temple plot. He could have caused a huge earthquake to
shift the nearby ground to fell a bunch of trees that would be needed
for the construction. God could have conveyed his message in many direct
ways, instead he just spoke through Joe giving revelation n, like usual,
even though some considered Joe to have lost his credibility by this
point. I'm just trying to say, if I were god, and told all these people
to start building my house, I would at least be benevolent enough to
help them out. . . Or if I weren't going to help them, I would send a
sign to everybody tasked with building the temple that they were fuckin
up by not getting started soon enough. Maybe a town fire everywhere
except for the plot where the temple would be. . . Maybe dysentery to
anybody that doesn't grab a shovel or hammer to help. . . I mean,
anything to show them my real intentions, but no, God just kept working
through Joe, his class A premium fuck-up of a prophet in so many
respects... Hardly sounds like divine providence to me.

Point is, if I were god, I would have done this a lot smarter. I would
have at least made it possible for the church to build it. I would have
given them the money and supplies necessary to finish it by my timeline.
But, Joe's God is apparently a bit inept when it comes to building
temples, because from the end of June 1833, to March 1836, the Kirtland
temple was slowly and arduously constructed at great cost and sacrifice
to Joe and the Mormons. This is an excerpt from the History of the
Church vols. 2 pp. 234

"Thursday June 25 \[1835\] -- There was a meeting in Kirtland to
subscribe for the building of the Temple; and \$6,232.50 was added to
the list. Joseph Smith subscribed \$500; Oliver Cowdery, \$750; W. W.
Phelps, \$500; of the above, all of which they paid within one hour, and
the people were astonished."

The best number I could find online was a cool \$40,000 required to
construct the entire temple, and we just read one part of how the money
was raised. Adjusted for inflation, that's almost \$1.1 million that the
church members had to come up with to construct the Kirtland temple.
Some of those funds were raised by tithing, and calling for specific
dollar amounts from various people, just like we read in the History of
the Church a second ago, but the vast majority of the money needed to
construct this temple was provided on credit. They built nearly the
entire temple with nothing but loans, which would bite em right in the
ass very soon. It's really no wonder that the construction took the
better part of 3 years to complete from when they actually started doing
it, until it was dedicated, they were too resource starved to build it.
Doesn't that further validate the point that this wasn't divine
providence? It seems like if God commanded a temple to be built, he
would give the church the means to do it, instead of requiring them to
undertake this monumental task for 3 years straight and bankrupting the
church along the way.

Add into the equation the fact that Joe was a shopaholic for stuff he
was interested in, and the church was kind of his own little piggy bank.
The church really started to suffer from lack of funds and poor
management. During the final phases of construction, Joe even decided to
buy some god awful mummies and Papyri for \$62,000 of today's money,
which could have been used on the temple, but was instead probably used
to buy Michael Chandler a new house.

Do we start to see why so many of Joe's revelations concerned money or
tithing? Joe couldn't stop spending money on stuff he wanted, while
there were plenty of other necessities that the church and its members
needed to continue to exist. The church was hemorrhaging money from
nearly every pore, and nobody could stop the bleeding. This financial
insolvency will culminate to become the biggest shitstorm the church had
ever seen up to 1838, and it's very important we understand that
building the Kirtland temple, was one primary factor of the money
bleeding that nearly collapsed the church 2 years after the temple was
dedicated. This doesn't seem like a very divine plan in my book.

The temple was basically finished by January of 1836, with just some
small details to be worked out by the time dedication rolled around on
March 27^th^. Joe must have been a bit euphoric about the progress that
was being made, because he came up with a revelation that enlightens us
to some things that must have been on his mind at the time.

Before reading this excerpt, let's look at some context. Right before
this, Joe had called Big Daddy Cheese to be the patriarch of the church,
and to offer patriarchal blessings for a fee. Being ordained into this
office required a blessing ritual, during which all the men of the
presidency gathered around BDC and anointed his head with oil, and
blessed him. After all the presidency did this, BDC stood up, and
returned blessings to all of them, including Joe, which sets up the
scene for what we're about to read from the History of the Church vols.
2 pp 380-381

"And in my turn, my father anointed my head, and sealed upon me the
blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days, even as Moses led
him in days of old; also the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All
of the presidency laid their hands upon me, and pronounced upon my head
many prophecies and blessings, many of which I shall not notice at this
time. But as Paul said, so say I, let us come to visions and
revelations."

We're nowhere near done for this passage, because it is absolutely
packed with bat-shit insanity. But I do need to point out that what
we're about to read was extracted from the History of the Church, and
canonized in the 1980's as a revelation in the current day BoCvnts 137.

"1 The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom
of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell.

 2 I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of
that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire;

 3 Also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and
the Son.

 4 I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance
of being paved with gold.

 5 I saw Father Adam and Abraham; and my father and my mother; my
brother Alvin, that has long since slept;

 6 And marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that
kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set
his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for
the remission of sins.

 7 Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying: All who have
died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if
they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial
kingdom of God;

 8 Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it,
who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that
kingdom;

 9 For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works,
according to the desire of their hearts.

 10 And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at
the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of
heaven."

So we can kind of see what was on Joe's mind here. His brother Alvin's
death was something that weighed on Joe for years. Alvin was a powerful
influence on the young Joe, and his deathbed words to Joe were basically
"Never stop until you get the record". That's a tale for a different
day, but it's still fun to put ourselves into Joe's shoes, and try to
understand what was causing him to have these revelations. What was on
his mind that caused him to see or say or write these things and claim
they were from God? By the way, we're still not done with that passage,
it goes off the deep end pretty soon, but keep that question in mind.
What was on Joe's mind that caused him to have these revelations.

"I saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who
hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together
in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet
swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their
midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and
wept.

I also beheld Elder M'Lellin in the south, standing upon a hill,
surrounded by a vast multitude, preaching to them, and a lame man
standing before him supported by his crutches; he threw them down at his
word and leaped as a hart, by the mighty power of God. Also, I saw Elder
Brigham Young standing in a strange land, in the far south and west, in
a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men of color,
who appeared hostile. He was preaching to them in their own tongue, and
the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his
hand, protecting him, but he did not see it. And I finally saw the
Twelve in the celestial kingdom of God. I also beheld the redemption of
Zion, and many things which the tongue of man cannot describe in full."

Alright, before reading that, I asked the question, what was on Joe's
mind to come up with these revelations. There is simply no way of
knowing, right? There's no possible way that we could understand what
would bring Joe to see things like this, which is a problem with
historical analysis. We can never really know the motivations behind why
a person does what they do, or in Joe's case, sees what he saw, but I
have a theory, and it has to do with what was on Joe's *head*, not on
his mind.

Run with me for a minute here. I'm going to read some rapid fire
excerpts out of the next few pages of the History of the Church, and
tell me if you notice a running theme. These visions happened in a room
with all of the presidency present. It was just a bunch of guys going up
into a room, and blessing and anointing each other with oil, and having
prophecies revelations.

"Many of the brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious
visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself."

"My scribe also received his anointing with us, and saw, in a vision,
the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and
many things which I saw."

"The Bishop of Kirtland with his Counselors, and the Bishop of Zion with
his Counselors, were present with us, and received their anointing's
under the hands of Father Smith, and this was confirmed by the
Presidency, and the glories of heaven were unfolded to them also."

"Hyrum Smith anointed the head of the President of the Councilors in
Kirtland, and President David Whitmer the head of the President of the
Councilors of Zion. The President of each quorum then anointed the heads
of his colleagues, each in his turn, beginning at the oldest. The
visions of heaven were opened to them also. Some of them saw the face of
the Savior, and others were ministered unto by holy angels, and the
spirit of prophecy and revelation was poured out in mighty power."

This might be the most blatant of all the passages with the point I'm
trying to make here, but we're going to read a few more after it.

"Prayer was offered up by the head of each quorum; and closed by
singing, and invoking the benediction of heaven, with uplifted hands.
Retired between one and two o'clock in the morning.

Next Day -- Attended at the school room at the usual hour, but instead
of pursuing our studies, we spent the time in rehearsing to each other
the glorious scenes that occurred on the preceding evening, while
attending to the ordinance of holy anointing.

In the evening we met at the same place, with the Council of the Twelve,
and the Presidency of the Seventy, who were to receive this ordinance
\[of anointing and blessing\]. . . After calling to order and
organizing, the Presidency proceeded to consecrate the oil.

We then laid our hands upon Elder Thomas B. Marsh, who is President of
the Twelve, and ordained him to the authority of anointing his brethren.
I then poured the consecrated oil upon his head, in the name of Jesus
Christ, and sealed such blessings upon him as the Lord put into my
heart. . . He then anointed and blessed his brethren from the oldest to
youngest. . . The heavens were opened, and angels ministered unto us."

"The Twelve then proceeded to anoint and bless the Presidency of the
Seventy, and seal upon their heads power and authority to anoint their
brethren.

The Heavens were opened unto Elder Sylvester Smith, and he, leaping up,
exclaimed: "The horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof."

"The gift of tongues fell upon us in mighty power, angels mingled their
voices with ours, while their presence was in our midst, and unceasing
praises swelled our bosoms for the space of half-an-hour."

"We accordingly closed our interview and returned home at about two
o'clock in the morning, and the Spirit and visions of God attended me
through the night."

I sure hope that I made my theory clear reading all of those excerpts,
and just for some information, those readings were all taken from 6
pages of the history of the church vols. 2 380-385. Six pages, and we
had 14 references to anointing with oil, anointing ordinance, or
consecrating the oil, 26 references to visions, seeing things,
beholding, seeing or having the heavens opened by multiple people in a
small group of 15 to 30 men, 6 references to angels, and a small handful
of other very similar sounding themes. Remember, every one of those that
I just read were taken from just 6 pages of the Church's official
history, I didn't have to pull all of those from across multiple books
or anything, they were all in just one place, talking about a 2-day
period. Passages like these aren't just localized to this one part of
the History of the Church either, they are peppered everywhere
throughout the pages of all 6 volumes of Joe being prophet. Sometimes
they show up more frequently as more revelations come along, sometimes
they are less frequent and the revelations slow down.

Let me also point out that these revelation sessions went until 1 or 2
o'clock in the morning for two nights in a row. Do those sound like
prayer parties, or just straight up parties? Tell you what, the next
time your kid comes home at 2 in the morning and tells you he or she was
studying the bible and praying with friends until that late, you may
want to treat that claim with a little skepticism. It seems a little
fuckin suspicious, don'cha think?! Maybe look at their pupils to see if
they're dilated, and don't forget to check their pockets for consecrated
anointing oil. Do you see the point I'm making here?

You may want to say that's absurd! Joseph Smith didn't use psychedelics!
Well let's look at the evidence. Native Americans had been using Peyote
for 5500 years before Joe's time for hallucinogenic trips. The oracles
of Pythia were coming up with their revelations while standing near
springs emitting ethylene and methane while chewing on Oleander leaves.
At least 8 of the young women during the Salem witch trials that were
killed, were likely infected with Ergotism caused by eating infected
grain, which made them convulse, spasm and hallucinate, spouting random
delusions that were interpreted as witchcraft. And, have you ever
wondered why witches ride broomsticks? Well, because it was first
observed in 1324 that these witches would rub nightshade oil on wooden
sticks and fuck themselves with it, causing hallucinations. Humans have
been using hallucinogens and other drugs for longer than they've been
writing.

Now, considering all of that information, and reviewing everything we
just read took from 6 PAGES of the church's own history, is it really
all that absurd to think this is what was going on with Joe and his
visions? Was it really what was on his mind, or did these visions have
something to do with what was on his head? Almost every time Joe was
anointed with this consecrated oil on his head, the heavens opened up,
and he had visions and heard god speaking. Almost every time somebody
else was anointed in the same way, and had this same oil put on their
head just like Joe, they saw visions, and angels, and had heaven open up
to them.

In 1822, Thomas De Quincey, a famous poet/bard, had a drug of choice for
his brainstorming sessions called laudanum. While not psychedelic,
laudanum is basically opium combined with alcohol and creates a
relaxing, open-minded sensation in the user. That's 1822!, merely 8
years before the Book of Mormon in England that somebody openly wrote
his poems while high on drugs. If you're looking for a naturalistic
explanation for where Joe's visions came from, I would assert that this
makes more sense than any other possible explanation.

I know this may sound absurd, that Joe was high all the time, but if you
look at the language he uses and compare it to the language of
psychedelic users back, then and even today, there are a stunning amount
of similarities. The most telling is the heavens opening up, that's
always preceded by the person being anointed with consecrated oil on
their head. Talk to anybody that's ever done shrooms or dropped acid, a
lot of times they will talk about seeing the universe or the stars open
up while they gain a whole new perspective on life. I was just recently
talking to a guy that'll remain anonymous, but for the purpose of the
story I'll call him the letter J. I got into the psychedelics
conversation with J recently, and I admitted that I've never imbibed any
psychedelics before, just the two mains, alcohol and weed. I'm working
off memory here, so pardon me if I remember this wrong, but he told me
about one of the times when he popped a couple caps of magic mushrooms
and he felt like God. . . I asked him what that meant, like you saw the
universe and cosmos created at your fingertips or something, and he said
No. . . he didn't know how to describe it, but he just actively imagined
that he was God, and he had this amazing feeling of omnipotence overcome
him, like he was in control of everything. It's hard to describe a trip
from what I can tell, because he also told me about the moments right
before this omnipotence, when he was petting his dog for like 3 hours
straight because it was SOOOO FLUFFFY!!! Needless to say, it sounded
amazing, and J did a much better job of describing his trip than I ever
could, but I'm pointing to the common themes here. The language J used
to describe his mushroom trip were oddly similar to the amorphous
language Joe used to describe his revelations that went until 2 in the
morning.

One thing we need to keep in mind is that the public perception of drugs
that we have today is wildly different than how drugs were perceived
back in the early 19^th^ century. Drugs didn't carry the taboos and
stigma that we see drugs having today, they were just god's gift to
bring you enlightenment. A person would go walking through the forest
and pick up some psilocybin, or cut the tops off cactus and refine them
into a powder or oil, and imbibe to speak with God, or see angels, or
connect with the holy spirit. Simple as that. It wasn't a schedule one
drug that the person would go to jail for having, it was just one of
god's many gifts that help us get closer to him or understand his mind.
It may sound degrading to Joe and friends to think that they were just
tripping balls whenever they came up with revelations, but that's only
because of the negative stigma that drugs carry today. When we consider
all aspects and possibilities of Joe using hallucinogens to come up with
revelations, it all seems to make sense, right?

There was a news article that I saw recently following an experiment
using LSD and brain scanners. Basically what these researches did is
scan some participant's brains with an fMRI scanner to see what their
baseline brain function looked like, and then they gave them some acid,
and looked at their brains through the fMRI again to see what their
brain activity looked like while under the influence of acid. The change
in activity was astonishing, and the article included some pictures from
the scanner to illustrate the point. Entire regions that were barely
active, or almost completely dormant in the first scan were suddenly lit
up like a Christmas tree with blood flow and activity while the
participant was on acid. The researchers described it like the
participant's brains were functioning much the way a very small child's
brain functions, which is much more open and active than most adult
brains. It really was a fascinating study, and it's spurring other
research grants into psychedelics and drugs that are considered worthy
of felony and jail time nowadays. This hyper-negative perception of
drugs like this has only been ingrained into the population since the
beginning of the war on drugs, which is a topic that I can't allow
myself to talk about, because that will just be the rest of the show. My
point is, drugs and hallucinogens weren't taboo in Joe's time. It was
perfectly natural to use drugs like this, and many of the passages we
just read sound oddly similar to psychedelic trips.

Also, it's not like Joe didn't have access to drugs like this. He wasn't
snorting Columbian cocaine that he used church funds to buy a kilo of
off his guy, this oil was likely from a plant found locally in the
forests of New York and Ohio. I'm up in Seattle and it's fungus country
up here. Anybody can go walking through the forest and find a couple
caps of magic mushrooms, they're everywhere. Joe, likely, had ready
access to a psychedelic oil, whether by his own findings, or from a
local salesperson that was making the oil to sell.

I suppose this leads to an overall question about probability. Is it
more likely that Joe and friends were using psychedelic oil and rubbing
it on each other's head to see these amazing things we read a minute
ago, or is it more likely that every single one of these guys were
inspired by God and locked into a trance of revelation and prophecy
until 2 in the morning? What is more likely? Only one of those is a
completely naturalistic explanation, and I've made my case and provided
my evidence to show you what I think, but you, the listener, should
decide what sounds most likely to you. I just ask that you pay attention
for when the phrase anointing oil comes up in the future, it may help
add a little more context to what we'll read immediately following those
magical words.

Alright, let's shift gears here and talk about the main point of today's
episode, that week and a half time from March 26^th^ to April 6^th^.
It's been a lot of buildup to this, and we've covered what was going on
with the Kirtland temple all the way up to this point. It's been a hard
and arduous task building it, and there are even reports of Joe himself
working on the temple with his own hands, which is amazing in and of
itself. The Mormons were working day and night to get this thing
finished, and Joe was bleeding the members dry of any funds they could
possibly devote to the construction of this great and spacious building.
Finally, by the evening of March 26^th^, the last of the dust from
constructing the temple was being swept away, and it was officially
completed and ready to be dedicated.

On March 27^th^, amazing things happened, and stories from this day are
revered as some of the most miraculous events in all Mormon history. The
dedication service for the Kirtland temple was held in the main chapel
area of the temple. It was 8 hours long, and there are stories floating
around of angels and spirits flying through the building during the
service, and all kinds of miraculous events, and I'm really not sure how
to interpret them. To any never-mos, this is a huge story that Mormons
will frequently point to when it comes to talking about angelic
visitations and miracles. This is one point in Mormon history that most
believers will know about if you ever strike up a conversation about
angelic visitation and miracles. The dedication of the Kirtland temple
is an occasion that Mormons hang their hats on, and we're going to read
as many accounts as I can possibly find that talk about it. If you talk
to believing Mormons about angels and miracles, they'll talk about God
and Jesus in the sacred grove, the angel Moroni with the plates, the
priesthood restoration with Peter James and John, and the Kirtland
temple dedication. That's how big this thing is in Mormon history.

My sources for this are primarily history.lds.org and mormonthink.com.
They both cover it quite well, and they can be viewed as the pro- and
anti- Mormon analysis of that fateful day. I just call it propaganda and
criticism instead of pro and anti. There will be links to both of these
articles in the show notes.

On the morning of March 27^th^, 1836, anywhere from 250 to one thousand
people gathered in the Kirtland temple. I say those numbers because
there are different numbers all over multiple sources, and I want to
cover all my bases. Luckily for us, there were quite a few people in
that crowd that kept journals, and were interviewed in later years
concerning this time in Mormon history. There's no shortage of
first-hand accounts of this occurrence, however we do have to examine
what some of them say. There are obvious contradictions between some of
the accounts, and we need to try and flesh out those contradictions
here.

Joe had encouraged everybody to fast the night before to hopefully
invoke the spirit even more, and by the time mid-morning rolls around,
most of the people's minds were in the right place. Then, once it turned
to afternoon, nobody can say exactly what happened, but something
changed, and angelic visitations began to happen. I'll read a bunch of
quotes that support angelic visitations first, then read some other
quotes that I feel enlighten us to the reality a little more.

Joseph Smith, Jr.\
\"Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was
heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple,
and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an
invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw
glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which
fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came
running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright
light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were
astonished at what was taking place.\"

Reference: Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., introduction and notes by B. H. Roberts
(Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
1932-1951), 2:428.

Oliver Cowdery\
\"Sunday, the 27th attended on the dedication of the Lord\'s house. For
the particulars of this great event see my account written by myself,
and printed in the March No. of The Messenger and Advocate, signed C. In
the evening I met with the officers of the church in the Lord\'s house.
The Spirit was poured out\--I saw the glory of God, like a great cloud,
come down and rest upon the house, and fill the same like a mighty
rushing wind. I also saw cloven tongues, like as of fire rest upon many,
(for there were 316 present,) while they spake with other tongues and
prophesied.\"

Reference: Leonard J. Arrington, \"Oliver Cowdery\'s Kirtland Ohio
\'Sketch Book,\'\" BYU Studies, Volume 12, (Summer 1972), 426.

Heber C. Kimball\
\"During the ceremonies of the dedication, an angel appeared and sat
near President Joseph Smith, Sen., and Frederick G. Williams, so that
they had a fair view of his person. He was a very tall personage, black
eyes, white hair, and stoop shouldered; his garment was whole, extending
to near his ankles; on his feet he had sandals. He was sent as a
messenger to accept of the dedication\...While these things were being
attended to\[,\] the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the
Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others.\"

Reference: Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints\'
Book Depot, 1854-1886), 9: 376.

 

George A. Smith\
\"There were great manifestations of power, such as speaking in tongues,
seeing visions, administration of angels. Many individuals bore
testimony that they saw angels, and David Whitmer bore testimony that he
saw three angels passing up the south aisle, and there came a shock on
the house like the sound of a mighty rushing wind, and almost every man
in the house arose, and hundreds of them were speaking in tongues,
prophecying or declaring visions, almost with one voice.\"

Reference: Ibid, 11:10.

Eliza R. Snow\
\"One striking feature of the ceremonies, was the grand shout of
hosanna, which was given by the whole assembly, in standing position,
with uplifted hands. The form of the shout is as follows:
\'Hosanna-hosanna-hosanna-to God and the Lamb-amen-amen, and amen.\' The
foregoing was deliberately and emphatically pronounced, and three times
repeated, and with such power as seemed almost sufficient to raise the
roof from the building.

Reference: Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York:
Tullidge &amp; Crandall, 1877), 95.

Benjamin Brown\
\"There the Spirit of the Lord, as on the day of Pentecost, was
profusely poured out. Hundreds of Elders spoke in tongues. We had a most
glorious and never-to-be-forgotten time. Angels were seen by numbers
present. It was also at this time that Elijah the Prophet appeared, and
conferred upon Joseph the keys of turning the hearts of the fathers to
the children, previous to the re-institution of the ordinance of baptism
for the dead.\"

Reference: Benjamin Brown, \"Testimony for the Truth,\" Gems for the
Young Folks (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1881), 65.

Truman Angell\
\"When about midway during the prayer, there was a glorious sensation
passed through the house \[Kirtland Temple\]; and we, having our heads
bowed in prayer, felt a sensation very elevating to the soul. At the
close of the prayer, F. \[Frederick\] G. Williams being in the upper
east stand- -Joseph being in the speaking stand next below\--rose and
testified that midway during the prayer an holy angel came and seated
himself in the stand. When the afternoon meeting assembled, Joseph,
feeling very much elated, arose the first thing and said the personage
who had appeared in the morning was the Angel Peter come to accept the
dedication.\"

Reference: Truman Angell, Autobiography, Our Pioneer Heritage, Writings
of Early Latter-day Saints, 198.

These were all important first-hand accounts of this wonderful
miraculous visitation of angels. Quite beautiful aren't they? These are
the occurrences that Mormons love to talk about when the dedication of
the Kirtland temple happened. Now I have to say, when I was younger I
heard stories of babies that stood on their seats and swung
handkerchiefs around in a circle over their heads at this ceremony. It
could have been this dedication or something else, because I'm
remembering it from way back, but that story floats around occasionally
and it sounds amazing, right? Babies jumping out of their mother's arms,
and shouting hosanna while waving a white handkerchief around, sound
like possession by angels or something. Well, I couldn't find a single
source for that anywhere. I don't know if that's because that story is
referring to a different time in Mormon history, or if it's just a
legend that evolved out of this Kirtland temple dedication, who knows.
Regardless, I couldn't find ANYTHING on it, and I'm hoping that some
listeners have heard the same story and can help me out here.

What can we gather from all of these accounts? Obviously, something
happened, and it was wonderful through the eyes of many people in
attendance. Many people saw angels flying around or walking through the
congregation, Joe saw some old prophets come and hang out in the crowd,
Heber C. Kimball saw the apostle John come sit down next to Joe on the
stand, people were speaking in tongues and throwing themselves around.
Everybody was shouting hosanna to god and the Lamb so loud that they
raised the fuckin roof. This must have been a sight to behold.

I have to ask, was this so epic because the Spirit of God was coursing
through the halls of the temple, or was it because another spirit was
coursing through everybody's veins. Here are some accounts from other
people that weren't so enchanted with the dedication ceremony. Some of
them had left the church by the time they gave these quotes, some of
them were still believing members talking candidly about their
experience.

William Harris\
\"In the evening, they met for the endowment. The fast was then broken
by eating light wheat bread, and drinking as much wine as they saw
proper. Smith knew well how to infuse the spirit which they expected to
receive; so he encouraged the brethren to drink freely, telling them
that the wine was consecrated, and would not make them drunk\.....they
began to prophecy, pronounce blessings upon their friends, and curses on
their enemies. If I should be so unhappy as to go to the regions of the
damned, I would never expect to hear language more awful, or more
becoming the infernal pit, than was uttered that night.\"

Reference: [concernedchristians.com](http://www.concernedchristians.com/index.php?option=com_fireboard&Itemid=42&func=view&catid=10&id=76819)

Mrs. Alfred Morley\
\"I have heard many Mormons who attended the dedication, or endowment of
the Temple say that very many became drunk\....The Mormon leaders would
stand up to prophesy and were so drunk they said they could not get it
out and would call for another drink. Over a barrel of liquor was used
at the service.\"

Reference: [concernedchristians.com](http://www.concernedchristians.com/index.php?option=com_fireboard&Itemid=42&func=view&catid=10&id=76819)

Isaac Aldrich\
\"My brother, Hazen Aldrich, who as president of the Seventies, told me
when the Temple was dedicated a barrel of wine was used and they had a
drunken pow-wow.\"

Reference: [concernedchristians.com](http://www.concernedchristians.com/index.php?option=com_fireboard&Itemid=42&func=view&catid=10&id=76819)

Stephen H. Hart\
\"Mr McWhithey, who was a Mormon\...said he attended a service which
lasted from 10 AM until 4 PM, and there was another service in the
evening. The Lord\'s Supper was celebrated and they passed the wine in
pails several times to the audience, and each person drank as much as he
chose from a cup. He said it was mixed liquor and he believed the Mormon
leaders intended to get the audience under the influence of the mixed
liquor, so they would believe it was the Lord\'s doings\....When the
liquor was repassed, Mr McWhithey told them he had endowment enough, and
said he wanted to get out of the Temple, which was densely crowded.\"

Reference: [concernedchristians.com](http://www.concernedchristians.com/index.php?option=com_fireboard&Itemid=42&func=view&catid=10&id=76819)

David Whitmer\
David Whitmer, one of the Three Witnesses; \"The great heavenly
\'visitation,\' which was alleged to have taken place in the temple at
Kirtland, was a grand fizzle. The elders were assembled on the appointed
day, which was promised would be a veritable day of Pentecost, but there
was no visitation. No Peter, James and John; no Moses and Elias, put in
an appearance. \'I was in my seat on that occasion,\' says Mr. Whitmer,
\'and I know that the story sensationally circulated, and which is now
on the records of the Utah Mormons as an actual happening, was nothing
but a trumped up yarn\...\"

Reference: The Des Moines Daily News, Oct. 16,
1886. [Link](http://www.concernedchristians.com/index.php?option=com_fireboard&Itemid=42&func=view&catid=10&id=76819)

William E. McLellin

\"In 1836 when they undertook to get an endowment in the Kirtland
Temple. All washed and with oil anointed themselves, and appeared in the
Temple at sunrise\...and about five hundred ministers took their places,
and solem\[n\]ly prayed. We remained there fasting until sunrise next
morning. We however partook of some bread and wine in the evening. And
some partook so freely, on their empty stomachs, that they
became drunk! I took care of S\[amuel\] H. Smith in one of the stands so
deeply intoxicated that he could not nor did sense anything. I kept him
hid from the crowd in the stand, but he vomited the spit-box five times
full, and his dear brother \[Don\] Carlos would empty it out of the
window."

> McLellin to Joseph Smith III, July 1872; cited in Stan Larson and
> Samuel J. Passey (editors), The William E. McLellin Papers 1854-1880
> (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2007), p. 493-494.

\"The endowment was sought for in Kirtland, O. on April 6th 1836, but
was not received, and was an entire failure\....\[the members\]
assembled at sunrise, and remained fasting until the next morning
sunrise. Then about five hundred ministers began to wend their way home
from than\[that\] noble building, many of them disappointed and
dispirited. The scene through which they had passed was one long to be
remembered. No display of power from God was given. Al the power given
was the power of man\....They had a little bread, sent in by the sisters
in the evening, The Twelve as servants carried round to them on servers
a little bread and wine, and some of them partook of the wine so freely
so as to become badly intoxicated!"

> McLellin to John L. Traughber, 14 December 1878, cited in Stan Larson
> and Samuel J. Passey (editors), The William E. McLellin Papers
> 1854-1880 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2007), p. 396.

Circa 1880

\"The morning arrived and some five hundred ministers assembled in the
Temple at sunrise\....We remained until sunrise next morning fasting,
excepting a little bread and wine furnished us in the evening. Some
partook of the wine so freely on an empty stomach, that they actually
became drunken! And a scene ensued that would be hard to describe. One
thing I state candidly, I saw no one man in that assembly that was
endowed with super-human power--no not one. This wonderful enduement
\[sic\] then was only a farce---a very great failure"

> McLellin, \"Reasons Why I am Not A Mormon, ca. 1880; cited in Stan
> Larson and Samuel J. Passey (editors), The William E. McLellin Papers
> 1854-1880 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2007), p. 421-422.

I don't know. . . What do you think? Was this some divine manifestation
of god, seen through the eyes of people that were fasting, and
therefore, spiritually close to god? Or, does it make more sense that
these people were starving and prone to hallucinations, and then given
alcohol, possibly mixed, or consecrated with something else, which
caused their minds to go over the edge of sanity to see and hear all
kinds of crazy shit?

What would we expect if there were indeed angels and dead prophets
roaming around the congregation? I assert that we would have uniformity
among hundreds of first-hand accounts. If Elijah was walking around with
a bunch of angels, everybody in the congregation would see it and talk
about it, there would be no room for doubt in the historical record.

Instead, what we see is an amalgamation of a bunch of different
testimonies of people that saw different things. Some people saw angels,
others didn't. Some people saw dead prophets, others didn't. Some saw an
angel come sit down next to Joe on the stand, others didn't. It is,
however, historically sound that they drank alcohol, and probably fasted
for the day before the ceremony, and food deprivation combined with
alcohol makes any mind VERY unstable. These people were prone to visions
and spiritual manifestations anyway, and you add in hunger and copious
amounts of wine to the equation, wine that may have been infused with
some of Joe's magic anointing oil, and that is a recipe for any sane
mind to see some really fucked up things. Then, these fucked up things
are told and re-told and printed in local newspapers, and become more
epic with each retelling, and eventually you see the evolution of a
legend that was based on hallucinations. Imagine how many things in
human history, that we consider historical fact, came from a situation
just like this. . .

So, what is historically reliable here; angelic visitations that only a
few people saw, or hallucinations brought on by an empty stomachs
combined with and alcohol/hallucinogen cocktail? Any time a Mormon will
talk to you openly about their history, I would say that there are few
topics better to discuss than the Kirtland temple dedication on March
27th, 1836. They will often use this as one of the miraculous events in
church history, but, upon digging a little deeper, it's more revealing
of Joe and his character than most other stories in Mormon history. Oh
yeah, don't forget, this was three years after the WoW came along, so
Joe and everybody else in that congregation was in direct violation of
that for like, the last half of the dedication, that's just one more
small detail worth pointing out.

That was the Kirtland temple ceremony, and the main point this episode
has lead up to. There's only one more thing I wanted to cover, and it
happened in the aftermath of this dedication ceremony. Like I said at
the beginning, the focus of this entire episode is the week and half
from March 26th, to April 6th. We had to cover a lot of ground to lead
up to this week and a half, but the dedication ceremony was the relief
of the historical blue balls up to that point. To take care of some
post-coital historical fun, let's take a minute to talk about Joe and
Ollie, which will take us to the end of the historical portion of
today's episode. Let's focus on Joe and Ollie's relationship for a
minute here.

We know that they were kind of the OG's of Mormonism, the dynamic duo
cousins and best friends that brought the BoM together to get this dirty
fucker of a religion pushed away from the docks and afloat in the sea of
madness that was the Burned-over District New York. They've had a bit of
a rocky relationship since the church began. Go back to any episode
after 17 and you'll find a mixed bag of anger, backstabbing,
reconciliation, and small moments of deep friendship in a continuous
vicious cycle. Ollie was a much more reserved personality, while Joe was
a bit more eccentric. Ollie was educated, and well spoken, while Joe was
a country bumpkin party-boy in many respects. But these differences in
personality didn't drive them apart until the church became the third
entity in their relationship. Rather, Ollie and Joe's differences
complimented each other, and served as the glue that fused them together
as best friends.

Have you ever had a friend that shares a vision of something with you?
Maybe a new type of invention, or a way to do something, or some
research, who knows, but the two of you seem to work great together
during the initial stages of whatever this vision is. But, as soon as
you start up a business with that person, something goes awry and the
business goes under, and the friendship breaks up, and you don't talk to
that person ever again because both of you feel like you got fucked by
the other person. I mean, not all businesses end up like that, but I'm
sure the vast majority of you can think of a situation like that
happening in your lifetime, whether it was school, business,
relationship, or otherwise.

Well, we're in the process of seeing this same thing happen between Joe
and Ollie. I have a feeling that they wrote the BoM and started the
church with a common goal in mind, what that goal was, I don't think
we'll ever know, but somewhere down the line, shit got derailed and
Ollie's vision departed from Joe's vision. Unfortunately for them both,
they didn't have the luxury of dissolving the business, cutting their
losses and moving on, because that business was the one true church. So
Ollie and Joe were locked in this bitter struggle since the beginning,
and didn't have an easy out.

Let's just recap some of the high and low points in their relationship
so far. They were best buddies when it came to treasure hunting, seeing
angels, or translating the BoM, but once the religion part came along,
that was the business that became the third entity in their
relationship, and fucked it all up for them. In episode 19 we talked
about the evolving priesthood claims that Joe kept making to supersede
Ollie as the one true leader. Joe asked Ollie to take care of some
problems in the church, Ollie did with some, and that boosted their
friendship, but he refused with others like with setting up the
Colesville church, which hurt Joe and made him feel betrayed. Multiple
times when Joe was out of town, Ollie would attempt to take the power
back, and incite insurrection within the ranks, and Joe would have to do
damage control as soon as he arrived back into town.

In episode 22 we talked about how violently opposed to priestcraft Ollie
was, and how much Joe relied on it to survive. This was one point where
irreparable damage was done to their friendship, because Joe had
codified a support system for the prophet as a divine revelation from
God, an action that Ollie despised; there's simply no walking that
shithorse back into the shitbarn.

After that, in episode 23, Ollie tried to turn the Whitmers away from
Joe's leadership, and Hiram Page came up with a revelation describing
where Zion is, which was a double knife in Joe's back, all orchestrated
at the hands of Ollie.

After that, in episode 24, we had possibly the biggest damager to Joe
and Ollie's relationship. . . Hingepin Sidney Rigdon. Ollie was falling
out of favor in Joe's eyes, and the vacuum of leadership left in the
betrayed wake of Ollie's deeds needed to be filled, and along came
Rigdon. He immediately stepped into Ollie's place, handling everything
from ecclesiastical matters, all the way down to sharing anointing oil
and having revelations with Joe to translate the bible or run the
church, just like Ollie and Joe used to do. Rigdon was Joe's new friend,
but just didn't hold a candle to his old friend, Ollie.

In episode 25, Joe's twins were born, and died within hours after their
birth. Joe was inconsolable, and made an immediate trip to Missouri in
the wake of it. Rigdon described what happened when Ollie and Joe met.
Ollie obviously knew exactly what had happened, and Joe needed his old
friend to help heal this freshly cut wound in his heart. Rigdon and Joe
didn't know each other on that level, so Ollie was the only person Joe
could turn to in this time of sadness and personal anguish. Rigdon
reported that when Ollie and Joe met, they embraced and tears flowed
freely from old friends. Even through all the shit they put each other
through, and all the backstabbing on both of their parts, Joe and Ollie
were still best friends, and nobody could fill that void in a time of
emotional need.

After this, Ollie slowly becomes less and less relevant in the
storyline. It's like Joe used him as a crutch when he needed it, but
cast Ollie aside like some kind of tool, once He was back on his feet.
Ollie was given the task of compiling the 1835 D&C, and had a few jobs
before and after, but their relationship had changed. If we look at Joe
and Ollie in 1829, translating for hours on end, going into the woods
anointing each other to see angels, and baptize each other, and then
compare that relationship to what we're approaching in 1836. There's no
way to quantify or describe what has happened here. We can't understand
how the relationship dynamic had been affected by Ollie and Joe's
muddled history up to this point.

The affair with Fanny would happen very soon after the thing we're going
to talk about next, which forever crippled Joe and Ollie's relationship,
and sent it spiraling down to destruction two years later.

On April 3, 1836, Joe and Ollie have one last hurrah of seeing things,
just like old times. After this, their relationship takes a couple of
hard turns, but we'll talk about those in coming episodes. This was
recounted in Joe's History of the Church, and was later canonized into
Section 110 of the Book of Covenants and it happened in the recently
finished Kirtland Temple, a week after the epic dedication ceremony we
just talked about.

"Visions manifested to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery in
the temple at Kirtland, Ohio, April 3, 1836. The occasion was that of a
Sabbath day meeting. Joseph Smith's history states: "In the afternoon, I
assisted the other Presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the
Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to
officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this
service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being
dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent
prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to
both of us."

 1 The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our
understanding were opened.

 2 We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before
us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like
amber.

 3 His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like
the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun;
and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the
voice of Jehovah, saying:

 4 I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was
slain; I am your advocate with the Father.

 5 Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me;
therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice.

 6 Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my
people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

 7 For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here;
and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

 8 Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine
own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do
not pollute this holy house.

 9 Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly
rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and
the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

 10 And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this
is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the
heads of my people. Even so. Amen.

 11 After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us;
and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of
the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the
leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

 12 After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of
the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed
all generations after us should be blessed.

 13 After this vision had closed, another great and glorious
vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven
without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

 14 Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of
Malachi---testifying that he \[Elijah\] should be sent, before the great
and dreadful day of the Lord come---

 15 To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children
to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse---

 16 Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your
hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the
Lord is near, even at the doors."

I don't want to speak too absolutely here, but this kind of seems like
it was Joe and Ollie's last hurrah as friends. Let me give you an
example from my own life to draw a little equivocation and try to
empathize with the situation a little bit. I had a really good friend
through all of Jr. high and high school. He was truly one of my closest
friends, but as he was preparing for his mission, I could tell that we
were beginning to grow apart. He left on his mission and I stayed in
Utah. Once he came back, it was like everything was completely
different. We tried hanging out a few times and it just became awkward,
and I can't explain what it was that made this awkwardness happen.
Fast-forward a couple of years, and I asked if he wanted to go get
dinner at a local place while I was visiting Utah. We went, but it just
seemed like it was a last hurrah. We had grown so far apart that
everything was just wrong, and weird feeling. We didn't laugh at the
same things anymore, we didn't have the same interests anymore, it was
almost like we were on a blind date as complete strangers. I haven't
seen that friend for a while now, and I hope that eventually we can
reconnect just like old times, but that's probably naïve. I understand
how these things go, people just grow apart, it's a fact of life.

I hate to sound like I'm projecting my own experience onto Joe and Ollie
here, because there is simply no way of knowing what it was like between
them, but it's how I've come to understand their relationship dynamic,
and quite frankly, it's a bummer. Joe and Ollie started out as the
dynamic duo, and this is what has become of their relationship. I'm
excited, but also a little reluctant to see what happens with Ollie in
the future, because, from what I can tell, he only joined back up with
the church after Joe died. . . Boom.... what does that say about their
friendship? Very soon after this last hurrah that Joe and Ollie had
where they saw Elijah and Elias, Moses, and God and Jesus and all that
good stuff, the story about Fanny Alger would go public. There's no way
of telling how long Joe was tappin dat Fanny, probably for a year, maybe
more before spring of 1836, but we do know that Ollie was extremely
offended by it. He would never forgive Joe for this little haphazard
sexual indiscretion, and it would become like a malignant tumor on their
already barely alive friendship.

Just like when that friend, that I talked about earlier, saw my pack of
cigarettes in my car door after he got off his mission, this affair was
something sinful that Ollie was violently opposed to and couldn't
ignore, and the implications of this sin seemed to shift the paradigm of
the already deteriorating relationship they had together. Ollie must
have known that there was no going back to the way things were. Joe had
switched up the game. Joe had changed everything forever, and once Ollie
was out of the picture, there was nobody but Emma to hold Joe back, and
she was much more prone to simply ignore his shenanigans than actually
do anything about it.

So, how do we wrap this all up? We've discussed more today than I
thought we would, and it's kind of been all over the place as far as
topics go. We started with talking about what temples are, and Joe's
vision of the temples in Kirtland and Independence. Then we took a hard
turn into a discussion about hallucinogens and Joe's use of them to
influence people's minds. Then we discussed the absolutely daffy
dedication ceremony and covered both the pro and anti sides of it. Then,
we finished with talking about the depressing evolution of Joe and
Ollie's relationship throughout the 7 years they've been in cahoots, and
their final moment in the light of the temple together, that marked a
huge change in their relationship...

What can be drawn from all of this? I guess I'll begin the final rant by
saying I love being a fan of history, and not an actual historian. I'm
not bound by so many constraints that real historians have to deal with
to stay relevant in their field. No real historian can get away with
talking about Joe and Ollie's relationship like this, and still maintain
their credibility. Real historians may talk about how there may have
been an influence of hallucinogens on the parishioners attending the
temple dedication ceremony, but if an actual historian asserts that Joe
willfully and maliciously drugged the members of the congregation to
induce spiritual visions, and bolster his place as spiritual leader of
the church, they instantly lose credibility.

That's the thing with history, it's so fluid and challenging to nail
down, and as soon as an historian makes a hard claim like that, they
lose their credibility. Luckily for me, and for this show, I'm
establishing my credibility on wacky claims like this, and encouraging
people to search this stuff out for themselves. I love Mormon history,
and one of the main things I love about it is how open to interpretation
it can be.

A believer in the church can look at the church's history website and
read a bunch of the quotes about the dedication ceremony that we read,
and walk away with a deeply spiritual feeling, knowing that the church
is true, and that God was watching over the congregation that day to
send down angels and prophets of old.

On the flipside, a non-believer in the church can sit down and look at
the same quotes that we discussed today and say, wow, what the hell was
in that cool-aid? Obviously Joe was just a cult leader willing to do
nearly anything to stay on top of his own little insular world, at the
cost of any means necessary.

Personally, I love Joseph Smith. I admire the guy. I revere the guy and
what he was able to do. I don't condone it, and I see a lot of it as
really fucked up, but I still admire his ability to do these things, at
the same time I'm trying to understand how he did them. I don't revere
the man as a prophet the way members of the church do, I revere him as a
genius with an endless drive to do what he wanted, and copious amounts
of sheer dumb luck on his side. I really do love Joseph Smith, the
historical man that we're getting to know more and more through every
historical episode, not the prophet with a breastplate and translators
on his face with the golden plates on the table in front of him. I love
the real Joseph Smith, and loathe the cardboard cutout that believers
see when they read about him, or hear miraculous stories about him. I'm
on an endless mission to depose that pathetic 2 dimensional Joseph Smith
with the real Joe that I am coming to know and admire so much.

I suppose it's a matter of interpretation of the facts, right? A
believer can look at these stories and see a beautiful prophet with
rough edges that get knocked smooth through his own transgressions. A
non-believer can look at these same stories and ask what Joe was
thinking, and why he did what he did, when he did it. As a fan of
history, I can posit all kinds of motivations and possible reasoning
behind what Joe did, and base the entire premise of this podcast on
those otherworldly claims. I can tell every one of you about my unique
and possibly crazy interpretation of the facts, and I don't risk
anything in doing so, except for possibly some actual historian that
might listen in occasionally and get angry at my lack of true
historianship. But even then, I invite the discussion. I want to open up
that line of conversation with somebody that thinks I'm being
intellectually dishonest or deceitful in my reporting of the facts in
some way, because I try to back everything up with at least some point
of reason... even if that reason is just taking the words "anointing
oil" and building an entire case of hallucinogen abuse on it.

Doesn't it all come down to judging the factual accuracy of a claim
based on the evidence for it, coupled with the reasoning surrounding the
claim, and the merits of the person making said claim? Let me pose an
example to you here going back to the Kirtland temple ceremony. The
church claims this occasion as one of the most miraculous and spiritual
occurrences in all Mormon history. Let's judge that claim and examine
the merits of the claim, based on who's making it.

The church reports the ceremony as a visionary experience had by all,
but they ignore the testimonies of others like David Whitmer and William
McLellin that claim it was just a drunken party. The church reasons that
the Lord was so pleased with the dedication that he sent angels to
manifest themselves in the congregation and on the stand, to signify to
everybody how pleased the lord was, but they ignore how unreliable these
contradictory claims were from the multiple people that saw different
things in the congregation. Now, let's think about the reason the church
would ignore some portions of the history here, and judge the merit of
their claim based on that reasoning.

If members of the church understood this spiritual occurrence the way we
understand it now, it may cause them to question their faith. If members
knew ALL of the facts surrounding this, the church might see it damage
their numbers of membership. Many members hang their hat on this
ceremony as a beautiful historical occurrence that proves this church is
ordained and approved of by God. If they understood this ceremony to be
nothing more than a drunken shroom party, they could no longer use this
as something that bolsters their faith, rather it would be a faith
damager. The church has motivated reasoning to report this historical
event in a specific way, blatantly ignoring contradictory facts.
Motivated reasoning is the key there. If the members couldn't use this
ceremony as a faith promoting story, the church's numbers may suffer,
and those members would no longer be giving the church 10% of their
income... that's the definition of motivated reasoning with every bit of
negative connotation to the phrase.

Let's contrast the church's reporting of the dedication ceremony to the
version every one of you just heard. I'm going to try and be critical of
my own analysis of the dedication ceremony, so forgive me if this sounds
disingenuous or something.

Not only did we read what the members of the church say about the
dedication ceremony, but we also read what people outside of the church
remembered about the occurrence. We tried our best to incorporate as
many facts as possible conveyed through newspaper clippings, and
first-person accounts, without ignoring any. I literally included EVERY
SINGLE quote I could find concerning the ceremony, and only omitted
quotes for boredom or repetitive nature. Given the quotes in the context
of Joe's possible use of hallucinogens, we were able to reason that Joe
may have mixed the wine with something a little more powerful that
caused those who drank enough to see spirits and angels, and all kinds
of things, without any of the visions concurring with each other.
Everybody in the congregation saw something different, or spoke in
tongues, or in the case of Samuel Smith, spent the majority of the time
throwing his guts up from the alcohol.

Now, let's judge the merit of these claims based on possible motivated
reasoning. Do I have motivation to make the facts fit with my narrative?
Undoubtedly, yes. Like any researcher, I have my own biases that I
wrestle with constantly. But I try to mitigate those by looking at both
sides. We read more quotes that bolster the spiritual explanation of the
dedication ceremony than we did ones that bolster the hallucinogenic
explanation, and we did that for the sake of intellectual honesty. But
do I have a sinister motivated reasoning to report things the way I did?

I would argue no, because of intellectual honesty. We read both sides of
the arguments, and I came to my own conclusions about the evidence
provided. But more importantly, I left links in the show notes and told
you all to look into it for yourself. If there's something that I fucked
up on, I want to know. If my reasoning is flawed, then let's start a
discussion about it. I'm not like the church, I won't excommunicate your
subscription to the podcast if I disagree with you about something,
rather, we'll open up a line of discussion and each learn something from
the other. I think that's where the biggest division comes into place
with the church's version of Mormon history, compared to my version of
Mormon history. I want to see both sides of the argument, and if I fuck
something up along the way, I hope somebody will call me out on it so I
can learn something new, make the correction, and move on with making
the podcast better and more intellectually honest every episode.

If the church were to take this approach with its members, I would
applaud them. I would commend their efforts to become more
intellectually honest, and answer the challenging questions that are
raised by their members. Instead, we see them pushing these people into
disfellowship or excommunication. Jeremy Runnels, the guy who wrote the
amazing CES letter, was recently excommunicated, and if you haven't seen
the video yet, look it up on youtube, or in the show notes for this
episode. Jeremy videos the entire thing on a watch camera, and it is
absolutely heart-breaking. Multiple times he asks the leaders very hard
questions, about the church, that are raised in the CES letter, and the
people holding the disciplinary council are stone fucking silent in
answer of each question. At one point, Jeremy asks them if any of the
people on the panel have read the CES letter, and not a single person
raises their hand. Not a single one of Jeremy's questions were answered.
They gave him about 20 minutes to plead his case, and he spent that
entire time asking questions to a panel of emotionless stone people. By
the end of it, Jeremy says I'm done with this kangaroo court, and I'm
excommunicating the church from my life, and hands them his resignation
letter, and good on him. Good job Jeremy, I don't think it could have
gone any better than it did, and Jeremy was rock fucking solid the whole
time.

Now I simply ask, is that intellectually honest? Jeremy brought up many
hard questions that the church has no answer for, and they attempted to
excommunicate him. Even during the tribunal, he asked the same
questions, stating many times, if there is anything wrong in the letter,
please tell me so I can change it... and the priesthood leaders that are
supposed to be enlightened with all the answers to lead their community,
sat there in dead silence in reply to Jeremy's questions.

At least Jeremy is honest. At least I'm honest with this show, and I
want to open up that line of discussion. If there were any church
representative that were willing to come on to this show to discuss
problems in the Mormon church and its history, I would gladly have them
on, and be one respectful motherfucker about it. But they won't...
Because they're scared.

There's no knowledge out there that scares me. I'm not scared to learn
anything. But there is no other way to describe the church's suppression
of knowledge than pure unmitigated fear. I would pity the church and its
leadership if they were deserving of pity, but I'm too fucking disgusted
to have pity. Their suppression and bastardization of history and
knowledge is an inexcusable retreat from the white hot light of truth,
and they simply can't keep it up forever. I just hope I'm there to watch
that white hot light burn their nearly 177 stone granite façades to the
fuckin ground. Yeah, they have 150 temples in operation, 16 under
construction, and 11 more announced right now. As soon as this episode
posts those numbers will probably be obsolete. 177 temples soon to be in
operation, while 565,000 people will go to sleep tonight without a home,
and 20,000 children worldwide die of starvation every single day. The
majority of the real estate inside those temples remains unused for the
majority of the time. Want to be the most charitable church in the
world, as you claim to be? Do something about those fucked up statistics
and put your money where the Book of Mormon tells you to put it.
