---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 40 - Second Mass Exodus plus Marie from My BoM!
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-40-second-mass-exodus-plus-marie-bom/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-40-second-mass-exodus-plus-marie-from-my-bom
libsyn_embed: 4744219
redirect_from: /2016/10/14/ep-40-second-mass-exodus-plus-marie-from-my-bom/

category: History
date: 2016-10-13 22:48:07 PDT
---

Ep 40 – Second Mass Exodus plus Marie from My BoM\!

On this episode, we pick up the historical timeline to finish out 1837
and glimpse into 1838. Dissent and defection have never attained levels
elevated beyond what we’re seeing in the timeline now. The Parrishites,
Brewsterites, the Church of Christ under Coe/Smalling/Harris, and a
small number of other breakoff factions hit the open religious market in
response to public dissatisfaction with Jo and his church. Jo, Rigdon
and friends make their way from Kirtland to Missouri and back, only to
be permanently chased out of Kirtland and relocate to Missouri during
the harsh winter months. This episode is a two-parter and includes an
interview with Marie Kent, host of the My Book of Mormon Podcast,
talking about our show and the D\&C in general, all while giving us a
glimpse into her life and study of Mormonism.

Kickstarter Campaign\!\!\!  
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2097402374/real-book-of-mormon-research-hub>  
  
Video Version of Kickstarter Episode  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YciTECX5ds>

Show Links:  
Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
Outro music by Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/  
Show Artwork http://weirdmormonshit.com/  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Links:

Manuscript History of Brigham Young  
<http://boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/MSHBY.html>

Joel’s D\&C comparison  
<http://www.joelakuhn.com/dc-compare/>

My Book of Mormon podcast  
<https://mybookofmormonpodcast.com/>

Welcome to episode 40 of the NMPC, the serial Mormon history podcast.
Today is Thursday October 13, 2016, my name is Bryce Blankenagel and
thank you for joining me.

Let’s jump into a quick recap because we have a two parter episode
today. We’ll start off with continuing our historical timeline, then
follow up by bringing on a good friend and fellow podcaster to discuss
the MyBoM PC and how it wraps into the Kickstarter campaign that’s
active for one more week.

The last historical timeline episode covered a small portion of time,
yet a heaping portion of dissent and murmuring happening in the church
at the end of 1837. That episode began with Parley P. Pratt, P-Cubed,
raising up a stirring against Jo for selling him some land at a 2600%
inflation rate, which spurred a lot of anger in the church leadership.

After that, Jo headed to Painesville to board a steamer for Canada and
was arrested multiple times. We talked about this happening in episode
38, but last episode we spent the majority of the time covering the
court documents for the one trial that was held that day against Jo. The
lawsuit was filed against Jo by a man named Grandison Newell, who had
filed nearly a dozen other lawsuits against the prophet by this time.
This lawsuit, however, was different than any other Jo had experienced
prior to this.

Previous court hearings against Jo usually fell along the lines of him
fucking over somebody on a business deal, or maybe calling a church
leader into question for apostasy, or whatever the case may have been;
but this lawsuit was different. Grandison Newell claimed that Jo tried
to have him killed by commanding it done by two men, Davis and Denton.
This situation sets itself apart as a defining moment in Mormon history
and Jo’s leadership.

When somebody wants another person dead, like for example, a prophet
wants a vicious anti-Mormon like Newell dead, there’s a couple of ways
to do it. The prophet can do the deed himself, hire an assassin, or the
scariest option, the prophet can command it to be done by divine
revelation.

Hiring an assassin is one thing, and killing somebody is something
related, yet quite different. But the most horrifying and sinister of
those options to somebody being put out of the way is a prophet
commanding it to be done, and it being done. Once Jo crossed the
threshold of commanding somebody to kill in the name of god, there’s no
walking that shithorse back into the shitbarn, and that’s what Grandison
Newell accused Jo of doing, giving directions from god for his followers
to go kill an anti-Mormon. That’s a new level of mob boss that Jo hit. I
made the argument in the episode that whether or not Jo actually ordered
the assassination doesn’t really matter when we examine the fact that
rumors were circulating that he’d done so, and Jo stood on trial against
Grandison Newell concerning said rumors.

After that we discuss an account given by Eliza Snow that claimed Warren
Parrish teamed up with some other apostates to try and take over the
congregation with pistols and bowie knives. This was after Jo and
friends had left for Missouri, so it’s no wonder the mice were playing
whilst the cat was tending to other rats in other places.

Let’s jump into the meat of this episode with a discussion about church
affairs in late September 1837. On September 27<sup>th</sup>, Jo and
friends left Kirtland for Far West to reign in the Whitmers and W.W.
Phelps, Double-Dub. Those church leaders in Missouri were running the
church out there contrary to the wishes of Jo and Rigdon at HQ, and they
decided to answer the problems by attending to the issues in person. As
stated in the last historical episode, as soon as Jo set foot outside of
Kirtland, the church imploded on itself and once trusted leaders in the
church were viciously opposed to the absentee rule of Joseph the
prophet.

This is a small extract from a letter exchange between John and Clarissa
Smith to George A. Smith, Jo’s cousin, dated Jan 1, 1838 taken from the
LDS personal archives. It is reprinted in Marquardt’s “The Rise of
Mormonism,” from where I’m extracting this passage.

“the spiritual condition at this time is gloomy also. I called the High
Council together last week and laid before \<them\> the case of a
company\<y\> of Decenters 28 persons where \[were\] upon after mature
Discussion proceeded to cut them off from the chh \[church\]; the
Leaders were Cyrus Smalling\[,\] Joseph Coe\[,\] Martin Harris\[,\] Luke
Johnson\[,\] John Boynton and W\[arren\] Parrish. We have cut off
between 40 & 50 from the Chh \[Church\] Since you Left”

Those were some big-time names in the leadership of the church and it
tacked 40 to 50 more people on at the end that had been cut off from the
church. That letter was sent on the first day of January 1838, so let’s
cover our timeline from the end of September when Jo and friends left,
to January 1838 to provide some context for this letter.

Once Jo, Rigdon and Ollie left for Far West, there were very few trusted
people living in Kirtland that wouldn’t overthrow the church. The loyal
followers of Jo were the minority in leadership positions.

It is worth pointing out that the average every-day follower of the
church wasn’t aware of most of the insurrection that was happening in
the higher echelons, they were just living their own lives and going to
church on Sunday as they were instructed by the prophet. The typical
member of the church may be experiencing hard times from the general
economy that was beginning an arduous depression, but the majority of
people that had lost money with the collapse of the KSS company were
leaders in the church, many of which who understandably held a grudge
against the prophet for fucking them on the rag-money he was responsible
for creating and circulating. The majority of the typical members of the
church were aware of things that were going on, but weren’t quite as
directly affected by it as, say, P-Cubed, P. P. Pratt, who’d been robbed
by Jo with three plots of land sold at a 2600% rate of inflation. The
average member didn’t experience that, they’d only heard about it from
other members of the church.

While the leadership of the church was amidst schism, many of the
followers of Jo were still faithful to his rule, having no real reason
to question his authority.

Many social or political movements in the past have been waged by a
vocal minority against a less vocal, or even silent, majority. The
temperance movement, a very small minority was able to pass a
constitutional amendment banning alcohol. The abolitionist movement,
very few people in the south wanted slavery to be outlawed, but once a
few people in the North were vocal enough about it, those anti-slavery
southerners were happy to jump on the bandwagon against the less-vocal
majority. Even declaring Independence in the first place was a minority
movement that was spearheaded by a vocal subsect of politicians that we
now call the founding fathers. Regardless of the example offered, the
principle holds; when somebody wants change, it requires a loud minority
to bring about that change, even if the majority is silently enjoying
things the way they are.

Unfortunately, most of what we read from trusted historical sources
during 1837/8 is quite biased because these people were the most
affected and the vocal minority of displeased leaders or members in the
church. People don’t often write good reviews if they have a good
experience, but they’re sure happy to write a bad review if they’re mad,
and that’s what we see in the historical record. A lot of people were
furious with the prophet and his leadership, a fury which makes its way
through the 180 years to inform us of the general opinion at the time.

Let’s read a chunk from the history of the church. As we know, the
History of the Church began being dictated by Jo at the beginning of
1838 and was published starting in 1842 in the Times and Seasons or
Millennial Star. This is the sanitized version of what was going on in
the church, after that we’ll read about this time from some other
sources to point out the stark contrast.

This is directly from the History of the Church during the time Jo,
Rigdon, Ollie, and friends were heading out to Far West. This is Vols. 2
starting with page 518.

“About this time Elder Parley P. Pratt, who was laboring in New York,
publishing his Voice of Warning, consisting of 216 pages.

I started from Kirtland on the 27<sup>th</sup> of September, in company
with Brother Sidney Rigdon, to fulfill the mission appointed us on the
18<sup>th</sup> of September by a conference of Elders, in establishing
places of gathering for the Saints (second mass exodus); Brothers
William Smith and Vinson Knight accompanying us.

Oct 1—Elder Lyman Sherman was elected High Councilor at Kirtland in
place of Jared Carter, removed to Far West.

Oct 2—Samuel H. Smith was elected president of the High Council, and
council voted that if a councilor absented himself from their meetings
without a reasonable excuse, he should be reported to the Church as a
delinquent. The High Council at Kirtland voted that the clerk grant
licenses to the members of the council (who wished to travel), signed by
the president and clerk.

We arrived at Terre Haute, Indiana, on the 12<sup>th</sup>, about midway
from Kirtland to Far West.

My Brother Hyrum’s wife, Jerusha Barden Smith, died on the
13<sup>th</sup> of October while I was at Terre Haute, and her husband
at Far West. She left five small children and numerous relatives to
mourn her loss; her demise was severely felt by all. She said to one of
her tender offspring when on her dying bed, “Tell your father when he
comes that the Lord has taken your mother home and left you for him to
take care of.” She died in full assurance of a part in the first
resurrection.

October 15—The High Priests’ quorum at Kirtland decided to take Doctor
Sampson Avard’s license until he returns and make satisfaction; and the
High Council concurred.”

Here we witness a culling of the weak, listen to the verbiage used in
the History of the Church.

“Oct 18—The High Council and presidents of the different quorums met in
the Lord’s House, Samuel H. Smith presiding, and after a lengthy
discussion concerning existing evils, agreed that it was time to
commence the work of reform, and voted unanimously to meet again in the
Lord’s House on Monday evening next, and invite the different quorums to
meet at the same time, and commence pruning the vine of God in Kirtland,
and thus continue the work evening after evening until it shall be
wisdom to stay their hands.

Phinehas Richards, Clerk of the High Council.

Sunday 22—The Church in Kirtland disfellowshipped 22 brethren and
sisters until they make satisfaction for uniting the world in a dance
the Thursday previous.”

After that they chastise John Johnson Jun. for selling “spirituous
liquors to those who were in the habit of getting intoxicated” and the
next passage deals with people that were running the underground liquor
market in Kirtland.

“Oct 29—Nine more of the brethren and sisters were reported to the
Church as having been engaged in the recreations of the 19<sup>th</sup>
instant and eleven of the thirty-one that had been reported made
confession.

On the 30<sup>th</sup> of October, Brothers Norris, Brewster, and
others, presented to the High Council a plan for the better organization
of the church in temporal affairs, stating that Moroni had appeared to
Collins Brewster. The council decided that it was a trick of the devil.

Most of those who were complained of for participating in the recreation
on the 19<sup>th</sup> and had not confessed, acknowledged their fault
to the High Council on the first of November and the remainder were
required so to do or be cut off from the Church.”

This sounds like it’s approaching chaos to me. They can’t reign in the
underground liquor that’s bought and sold in Kirtland, they can’t get
people to confess of their wrongdoings, the leadership disfellowshipped
22 people in a week and another 31 in the following weeks for being
opposed to the High Council and all of this was going on while the
prophet, Ollie, Hyrum and Rigdon were travelling from Ohio to Missouri
and back.

Let’s shift our focus from affairs in Kirtland and discuss what happened
when Jo and friends arrived in Far West, Missouri. It continues on:

“I arrived at Far West some time in the latter part of October or first
of November. A meeting of some of the Church was called in the sixth to
counsel on certain affairs of the Church, which I attended with Brothers
Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. There were present also Elders Thomas B. Marsh,
William M’Lellin, Lyman Johnson, William Smith and Vinson Knight, from
Ohio, the High Council of the Church of Far West, and some other Elders.
Prayer by W.W. Phelps.”

This meeting was quite important. The Far West church was running off
the rails and Jo and Rigdon needed to set things back in order. This
meeting on November 7<sup>th</sup> was crucial in the preservation of
the church and Jo as the head prophet. During this meeting, a vote was
held to sustain Jo as the president of the church to preside over the
same, with president Sidney Rigdon as his counsellor. The votes were
unanimously passed, which should be taken with a grain of salt, but when
Jo tried to get Frederick G. Williams, Freddy Willey, to be second
counselor, a bunch of people stood up and objected to the vote. General
Lyman Wight was the first to object to the nomination of Freddy Willey
because he saw some information in a letter written by Freddy Willey
that could be considered heretical, making Freddy unfit to lead. Thomas
Marsh, James Emmet, Thomas Grover and some others all objected to Freddy
Willey being second counselor, so Hingepin Rigdon stood up and said, “I
nominate Hyrum Smith to be second counselor,” which carried out a
unanimous vote in the affirmative.

A culling of the weak was going on back in Kirtland, so it’s only
fitting to have a similar culling happen in Far West, and that’s what
happened. At this time, the Whitmers and Phelps were opposed to the
church, but must have had a good talking to, because they were placed
back in leadership positions operating under Ollie Cowdung, who would be
Jo’s eyes and ears once he went back to Kirtland. The entire Church
structure in Far West was reorganized with the most trusted individuals
being placed at the top with less trusted people serving under them.

The council minutes end with something quite fascinating that will serve
to drive a massive wedge between Jo and Ollie.

“Adjourned until early candle light, and met accordingly, when remarks
were made by many of the authorities present upon the previous
disposition of the town plat, the purchase of land, etc.; and all
difficulties were satisfactorily settled except a matter between Oliver
Cowdery, Thomas B. Marsh, and myself, which was referred to us with the
agreement that our settlement of the affair would be sufficient for the
council.”

I’m not going to tease you with what that affair may have been, because
it was very simple, it was the Fanny Alger affair. In April of 1838,
Ollie wrote a letter to his brother talking about the dirty, nasty,
filthy affair, which is exactly the issue that Ollie and Marsh raised
that Jo was able to sweep under the rug and settle it to a point that
was sufficient for the council, which meant they weren’t throwing
punches anymore. This is the wedge to which I’m referring. The Fanny
Alger situation simply wouldn’t die. It had been following Jo around for
nearly two years by this point, and Ollie still wasn’t satisfied with
Jo’s bullshit justification that allowed him to be a pious prophet
while still fucking that hot 19-year-old that lived in his house that
one time.

If we could point to one thing that drove Ollie away, Fanny Alger was
it. Obviously Jo and Ollie had their differences, especially when it
came to Rigdon’s place in their three-way friendship and I would say
that Ollie had dealt with Jo’s shit for nearly a decade by this point,
but at some point, Ollie couldn’t take the shit anymore and did
something about it. But we’ll have to talk more on that in the coming
historical timeline episodes.

Let’s continue on. The High Council was organized in Far West, something
that needed to be done in person by Jo and Rigdon to instate a level of
presence within their leadership. Soon after this council was held, Jo
and Rigdon headed right back to Kirtland. It was an 800-mile journey for
a couple hours’ worth of organization meetings.

In the middle of November, they left Far West to make their way back to
Kirtland, all the while, the Kirtland church was amidst a melt-down.
Chaos and pandemonium were gripping the saints in this headquarters of
the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints. Last episode when we talked
about Warren Parrish’s armed uprising, that was happening while Jo and
Rigdon were on their way back to Kirtland. On December 10<sup>th</sup>,
1837, they arrived in Kirtland, so let’s discuss what happened during
their nearly month long journey back to Ohio.

This is from the council minutes at Kirtland on Nov 20<sup>th</sup>,
more than half a month before Jo and Rigdon would arrive back at HQ.

“Reuben Hedlock preferred the following charge against Zenos H.
Brewster, Jane Brewster, Collins Brewster, D. H. Dustin and wife, Moses
R. Norris and wife, Eliza Norris, Samuel Barnet, Jemima Butler, Osman M.
Duel, \_\_ Butler, and Roxanna Repsher, for giving heed to revelations
said to be translated from the Book of Moroni by Collins Brewster, and
for entering into a written covenant different from the articles and
covenants of the Church of Latter-day Saints, and following a vain and
delusive spirit.”

The council heard arguments from the people listed and they claimed that
the current Church had departed from its holy roots and that they were
following new revelations that were more in line with what the original
church was. By the end of the council, every single person listed was
disfellowshipped and treated as apostates to the one true Church of the
Latter-day Saints.

That Collins Brewster that was listed as the 3<sup>rd</sup> Brewster on
the list of people we just read, was actually James Collins Brewster,
the founder of the Brewsterite sect of the Church of Christ. He claimed
he was the one true prophet and that Jo had departed from being prophet,
and once Jo died in 1844, James C. Brewster began to amass a following
and lead a group of Brewsterites to live in the New Mexico desert, which
promptly collapsed in 1851. This was a different sect than the
Parrishites that followed Warren Parrish after he broke off the church
at this same exact time.

So we have the Parrishites, the Brewsterites, and then we have
NSSMHarris teaming up with a couple guys named Cyrus Smalling and Joseph
Coe to take back the church and found their Church of Christ. This is
continuing on in the History of the Church vols 2.

“I returned to Kirtland on or about the 10<sup>th</sup> of December.
During my absence in Missouri Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke S.
Johnson, Joseph Coe, and some others united together for the overthrow
of the Church. Soon after my return this dissenting band openly and
publicly renounced the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints and claimed
themselves to be the old standard, calling themselves the Church of
Christ, excluding the word “Saints,” and set me at naught, and the whole
Church, denouncing us as heretics, not considering that the Saints shall
possess the kingdom according to the Prophet Daniel.”

This is from the Geauga County records and I’m reading it from the Rise
of Mormonism page 442.

“ State of Ohio} Be it known that before me Warren A. Cowdery a Justice
of the Peace in and for Kirtland Township in said County personally
appeared Joseph Coe, Martin Harris & Cyrus Smalling and took the
following oath to wit; You and each of you do swear in the presence of
Almighty God, that you will support the Constitution of the United
States and the constitution of the state of Ohio, and will faithfully
discharge your duties as Trustees of the Church of Christ in Kirtland
township in said County to the best of your abilities.”

That was an oath taken on Jan 18<sup>th</sup> 1838, but the organization
of the Harris/Coe/Smalling Church of Christ was in the works since
mid-November of 37. This really is a remarkable time in our historical
timeline…. NSSM was literally the third person to enter our timeline. Go
back and look at the episode list, Episode 1 is Jo, Episode 2 is an
introduction to Emma Hale who would become Emma Smith in 1827, and then
Episode 3 is our introduction to Martin Harris, NSSM. He was with us
before Ollie Cowdung, Oliver Cowdery who entered on Episode 5. NSSM has
been a pinnacle of hilarity and characterization of the absurdity of an
early 19<sup>th</sup> century mindset for us to laugh along with.

NSSM was quoted with walking through the woods and talking with Jesus in
the form of a deer for some number of miles. NSSM was the guy who took
Jo’s revelation on snake handling seriously during Zion’s camp and was
bit on the foot by a snake. NSSM was swindled by Jo because he dropped
his toothpick and couldn’t find it, but Jo did with the magic rock in
hat trick. NSSM is the perfect example of a typical credulous mindset
that was repeatedly Jo’s target since the day he met Jo. And now, after
a decade of working with Jo, and two years in our timeline, NSSM was a
heretic, and upon Jo’s return to Kirtland in December, Marty was
responsible for leading away the largest chunk of the congregation that
any of these breakoff sects resulted in. More people followed Joseph Coe
and Martin Harris than they followed Warren Parrish or the Brewsters.
This was a monumental time during church history, and NSSM didn’t just
leave peaceably.

He stood up during one of the congregations and stated something that is
truly the most damning indictment against the BoM by one of the three
witnesses, and bankroller of said book. This is taken from a letter that
a man named Stephen Burnett wrote to Leadfoot Lyman E. Johnson. Burnett
was an early convert in Kirtland and had been a faithful Jo follower for
over half a decade by the time he wrote this letter describing a
remarkable scene. This is taken from the LDS archives in an 1839
letterbook where the letter was copied and reprinted.

“I have reflected long and deliberately upon the history of this church
& weighed the evidence for & against it—loth to give it up—but when I
came to hear Martin Harris state in public that he never saw the plates
with his natural eyes only in vision or imagination, neither Oliver nor
David & also that the eight witnesses never saw them & hesitated to sign
that instrument for that reason, but were persuaded to do it, the last
pedestal gave way, in my view our foundations was sapped & the entire
superstructure fell a heap of ruins, I therefore three weeks since in
the Stone Chapel gave a full history of the Church since I became
acquainted with it, the false preaching & prophecying of Joseph together
with the reasons why I took the course which I was resolved to do, and
renounced the Book of Mormon with the whole scene of lying and deception
practiced by J. S. & S. R. in this church, believeing as I verily do,
that it is all a wicked deception palmed upon us unawares… M. Harris
arose & said he was sorry for any man who rejected the Book of Mormon
for he knew it was true, he said he had hefted the plates repeatedly in
a box with only a tablecloth or a handkerchief over them, but he never
saw them only as he saw a city throught a mountain. And said that he
never should have told that the testimony of the eight was false, if it
had not been picked out of \[h\]im but should have let it passed as it
was”

And I’m afraid that’s it. NSSM publicly denounced the testimony of the
witnesses included in EVERY SINGLE BoM since the beginning of its
publication in 1830. He said he only saw the plates the way a person
sees a city through a mountain, and that his natural eyes never beheld
the plates, that he only hefted them while covered and saw them in
vision or imagination. This is the guy that funded the fucking BoM\! If
not for NSSM being somehow convinced that the BoM is true, we wouldn’t
have the damn thing, and Joseph Smith would be a nobody in American
history. And just like that, after all Marty’s shenanigans and reckless
credulity which enabled Jo to fuck him over so many times; he exits our
historical timeline. Marty has a very fulfilling life after this, he
leaves behind the Church of Christ in Kirtland to live in a Shaker
community for a while, then joins some other churches and eventually
moves out to Utah in the late 1860’s, but this was the final straw for
Marty following Jo. Jo and Marty wouldn’t share correspondence or even
be in the same city together from this point forward. In June of 1841,
NSSM was quoted in the Painesville Telegraph with saying “I believe that
the work in its commencement was a genuine work of the Lord, but that
Smith, having become worldly and proud, has been forsaken of the Lord,
and has become a knave and impostor. He expects that the work will be
yet revived, through other instrumentalities.”

Harris’ name may come up in the future of our historical narrative
before Jo dies in 1844, but this really is it. NSSM finally had enough
and we must bid him adieu and godspeed for his trials and tribulations
that face him in the future. Thanks for being such a barrel of laughs
Martin Harris…

Let’s finish out the short historical timeline for this week’s episode
so we can get to a conversation I had with one of the greatest new
podcasters out there.

Back in October, after Jo had gone through the whole Grandison Newell PR
debacle, another court was held against Jo and Rigdon in absentia, from
which a guilty verdict came down and they were fined $1000 each for
illegal banking practices. We may sit back and say, well, everybody
wanted a piece of Jo and Rigdon by this point, what was so special about
this court ruling? Well, Grandison Newell had filed this lawsuit,
separate from the one claiming Jo tried to have him killed, and people
were owed this $2k in damages. We’ll talk about the fallout of this
court ruling and the rash decisions made by Jo and others to answer next
episode, but for now, let’s find out what happened for the rest of
December 1837 to close out this year and officially open up 1838.

Jo had arrived back in Kirtland from Missouri on December
10<sup>th</sup>, only to find that the church which was teetering on a
knife edge when he left in September, was now lying in a pile of chaos
and ruin with no rhyme or reason to it. People wanted Jo either usurped
or dead, anything but what he was doing before. Kirtland was no longer
safe for the prophet, so, Jo, Rigdon, and a few other trusted
individuals left Kirtland, permanently this time.

Jo and Rigdon fled quickly with their families to make their way back to
Far West, where Jo and Rigdon had just reestablished the church
hierarchy to be filled with trusted individuals with Ollie as Jo’s eyes
and ears while he’s gone. This is a passage taken from the Manuscript
History of Brigham Young, hosted on Boap.org, check the show notes for a
link.

“On the morning of December 22nd, I left Kirtland in consequence of the
fury of the mob and the spirit that prevailed in the apostates, who had
threatened to destroy me because I would proclaim publicly and
privately, that I knew, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Joseph
Smith was a Prophet of the Most High God, and had not transgressed and
fallen as apostates declared.

On reaching Dublin, Indiana, I found my brother Lorenzo and Isaac
Decker, and a number of other families who had stopped for the winter.
Meanwhile the Prophet Joseph, Brothers Sidney Rigdon and George W.
Robinson came along. They had fled from Kirtland because of the
mobocratic spirit prevailing in the bosoms of the apostates.

Here the Prophet made inquiry concerning a job at cutting cordwood and
sawing logs, after which he came to me and said, "Brother Brigham, I am
destitute of means to pursue my journey and as you are one of the Twelve
Apostles who hold the keys of the kingdom in all the world, I believe I
shall throw myself upon you, and look to you for counsel in this case."
At first I could hardly believe Joseph was in earnest, but on his
assuring me he was, I said, "If you will take my counsel, it will be
that you rest yourself and be assured, Brother Joseph, you shall have
plenty of money to pursue your journey."

There was a brother named Tomlinson living in the place, who had
previously asked my counsel about selling his tavern-stand. I told him
if he would do right and obey counsel, he should have opportunity to
sell soon, and the first offer he would get would be the best. A few
days afterwards Brother Tomlinson informed me he had an offer for his
place. I asked him what offer he had; he replied he was offered $500 in
money, a team, and $250 in store goods. I told him that was the hand of
the Lord to deliver President Joseph Smith from his present necessity.

My promise to Joseph was soon verified. Brother Tomlinson sold his
property and gave the Prophet three hundred dollars, which enabled him
comfortably to proceed on his journey.”

One nice little fuck you from Jo there, right? I mean, the “fuck you”
was carried out by Bloody fucking Brigham, but, as always, Jo was the
one in desperate need of money so it was a fuck you by transitive
property.

To sum up the passage as a whole, Bloody Brigham’s life was at stake. He
was one of the most ardent supporters of Jo, and once Jo and Rigdon left
Kirtland, it was no longer safe for Brigham to be there. This fearless
movie villain mold that I’ve pictured Bloody Brigham fitting perfectly
into up to this point, was shaken to his very core for fear of his life
and had to run away, that’s how polarizing Jo was and how cancerous
support of him could be by this point. People hated Jo so much by this
point that they were threatening the lives of not only him, but also of
his closest supporters. People have to be really mad at somebody if
they’re driven to a point that they might kill somebody just for
supporting the person they’re mad at. This was a whole new level.

The move from Kirtland to Far West was an ugly and arduous one, we’ll
read more from the Manuscript History of BY next historical episode to
narrate the journey, but needless to say, they weren’t moving the 800+
miles through Ohio, Illinois, and Missouri in the winter with moving
vans, we’re talking covered wagons, and the shit these people dealt with
was some hardcore frontier shit around which none of us could even begin
to scarcely wrap our minds.

On January 12<sup>th</sup>, barely a month after arriving back in
Kirtland, Jo gave a revelation and left for Missouri at 10:00 p.m. to
avoid detection. This is the revelation taken from the History of the
Church vols. 3

“Thus Saith the Lord Let the presidency of my church take their families
as soon as it is practicable and a door is open for them to moove unto
the west as fast as the way is made pla\[in\] before their faces and let
their hearts be comforted for I will be with them.”

Then he fuckin ran, lickedy-split, as fast as the prophet has ever left
any city before, Jo and Emma gathered their things and left, meeting
Bloody Brigham in Dublin, Indiana, and the scene we just read a second
ago played out.

I had the opportunity to speak with a couple of missionaries this week.
I was down at the local university campus to do a couple of studies and
use their library, and whilst sitting in the main square reading the
Rise of Mormonism, two missionaries walked by. I fumble fucked my book
back into my bag and chased after them only after I had pinched myself,
just to be sure. We discussed many things during our 45 minute
conversation, but one thing we did talk about was anti-Mormons in the
history.

I told them the story about Brother Snider taking 200 Books of Mormon in
the England mission and burning them, to which they agreed was a very
anti-Mormon action to take, but when we discussed that last episode, or
whenever that was, I was more interested in knowing some details about
this Brother Snider. When did he go on his mission? Who did he talk to?
Who was his companion? Why did he leave? Did somebody make him angry, or
did he realize the truth? Why did he feel the need to burn 200 Books of
Mormon when he left? Countless questions circulated through my mind
about this guy and I want to know more. But, alas, he was labeled as an
anti-Mormon and his story will likely never be told. That’s probably one
of the more frustrating things with the historical record surrounding
the Mormon religion is the one-sided nature of things. We can read
anti-Mormon literature written by people like Grandison Newell or Eber
Howe, and we can read the sanitized version of Mormon history from many
sources, especially the History of the Church, but we don’t get much
closer to understanding the people behind the history. People are always
people, and they don’t generally do things unless they have a good
reason. Snider probably felt like he had a good reason to burn those 200
books, or else he probably wouldn’t have done it. That leads us to a
question.

When we research the history of the church during this tumultuous period
of strife and unrest, we often tend to lose the human element to things
and just look at everything with a pro-Joseph or an anti-Jo lens. All of
those people that left the church and started their own churches had
good reasons to do so. NSSM had a good reason to stand up in the middle
of church and declare that he never actually saw the gold plates right
before he joined up with Smalling and Coe to start their own church.
Ollie had his good reasons for leaving the church in spring of 1838, and
we get a small insight into why during his letter exchanges. But the
question is, what is missing? There’s truly no way we can know the shit
these people were dealing with and the motivation behind their
reasoning, but they probably had good reasons to do whatever they did.

That’s probably one of the main takeaways from my conversation with the
missionaries, what is missing from the record that could never be
replaced with journal entries or court documents? To put it simply, I
think it’s the human element. When researching these individuals, it’s
easy to put a nickname or a person’s printed name into a situation and
speculate as to why things went the way they did, but it’s even easier
to lose sight of the fact that these were real people dealing with real
world frustrations and feelings about the prophet and their eternal
salvation.

I said a couple of episodes back that this 1837/8 defection crisis
effected EVERYONE\! Regardless of their position in the church or its
leadership, every single person was affected somehow by this fracturing
of leadership. The everyday non-leadership member of the church was
suddenly faced with a decision that had eternal implications.

Picture yourself there. You’ve been following Joseph Smith for 5 years
since you read the BoM and had a burning in your bosom that told you it
was the Lord’s truth. Rumors arise that the prophet has been fucking a
teenager, fucking investors in the KSS company, and fucking anybody that
stands in his way like Grandison Newell. A bunch of trusted leaders of
the church, people that are your friends, are suddenly considered
heretics and begin to break off and make their own churches, each with
varying degrees of faith in the BoM and Jo’s revelations. Then Jo comes
up with a revelation that you have to leave everything you have behind,
for the second time since you joined the church, and move to Missouri,
where Mormons are dragged out into the streets and beat to death or shot
after being chased out of their homes. What the fuck do you do? An even
bigger question than that, which must have played into people’s decision
making, what does God want me to do? Which of these people are true
prophets, and which group will lead me to heaven in the afterlife? It’s
not just about homes, businesses, friends or family, this is a question
that has eternal ramifications on your everlasting soul, so I ask again,
what the fuck do you do in this situation?

There really isn’t an easy answer to that question and we’re looking
back on this from 180 years in the future; we aren’t the people that
actually dealt with this and had to make these hard decisions. I admire
the people that went through this, and made the decisions they made.
They had no idea that the whole thing was a load of bullshit and they
would be much better off joining a local Methodist sect or something,
that’s a luxury we have with the power of hindsight, this was eternal
life or death to these people. We can never lose sight of that aspect of
our historical analysis; the human element. These were fellow human
beings going through this, not just names in a book or nicknames on a
podcast.

Speaking of podcasts, I’m excited to introduce the guest of this
episode, a fellow podcaster that’s been taking the community by storm.
