---
layout: post
title: >
    CC - Mark Hofmann pt. 3
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/cc-mark-hofmann-pt-3/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/cc-mark-hofmann-pt-3
category: CC
date: 2016-09-16 20:40:48 +0000
---

CC - Mark Hofmann pt 3

On this episode, we finally reach the conclusion of our 3-part
deconstruction of Mark Hofmann. From young missionary to old man in
prison, this has been one wild ride with Mark from his birth in 1954,
through his days forging documents throughout his 20’s and finally
ending at his plea bargain at the age of 32. This episode even features
a surprise interview from an unexpected guest with a funny voice.

Show Links:  
  
Website http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com  
  
Twitter @NakedMormonism  
  
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311  
  
Patreon http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism  
  
Outro music by Jason Comeau http://aloststateofmind.com/  
  
Show Artwork http://weirdmormonshit.com/  
  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Links

Deseret News Canyon Home article  
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC&dat=19851120&printsec=frontpage&hl=en>

George Throckmorton and William Flyn  
<http://www.utlm.org/onlinebooks/trackingch6b.htm#SALAMANDERLETTER>

Roderick McNeil ink dating study  
<http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ba-1984-0205.ch013>

Deseret News Cowdery History article  
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC&dat=19861016&printsec=frontpage&hl=en>

UTLM State of New York v. Joseph Smith  
<http://www.utlm.org/newsletters/no68.htm>

Mark Hofmann timeline  
<http://files.lib.byu.edu/ead/XML/MSS1571.xml>

Welcome to this clean cut episode of the Naked Mormonism Podcast, the
serial Mormon history podcast. Today is August 25, 2016, my name is
Bryce Blankenagel and thank you for joining me.

What you’re about to hear is part 3 of an examination of Mark Hofmann,
one of the greatest forgers known to history. If you want to know about
everything up to this point, I may recommend going back and listening to
part 1 and 2. If you don’t mind picking up in the middle of a story, or
you’re all caught up, this is the episode for you.

Why is it important to learn about Mark Hofmann? I’ve been asking myself
this for a few weeks now, and I’m not sure I have a definite answer.
Yes, I find him to be fascinating, and I need no further excuse to
research something than simple fascination, but there’s more to Hofmann
than I could understand if I were to study him for decades. I suppose
any story like this, that sits in living color in front of us, is just
as fascinating, but there are certain elements to the Hofmann story that
keep my mind racing at night while I stare at the blank ceiling above.

Why?... Why is a powerful word, isn’t it? I just went on vacation, Why,
because I needed to leave the city for a weekend. I just went for a bike
ride, Why, to get some exercise and enjoy the outdoors. I just killed
two people and almost myself with sophisticated pipe bombs, Why……. Why
why why…

On the evening of October 16<sup>th</sup>, 1985, Hofmann was in the ICU
of LDS general hospital, recovering from his own bomb that had flayed
the roof off his car and severely damaged his leg and hands, and left
open gashes on his forehead and body. After questioning Hofmann, the
police found probable cause to search his home where they found his
document forge and a green letterman jacket that a witness had seen
Hofmann wearing before dropping off the bomb that had killed Steven
Christensen.

The police had reason to believe that Hofmann was a lone bomber without
any accomplices, and I’ll tell you right now that there is no evidence
to suggest otherwise and I don’t align with conspiracy theories that may
claim otherwise.

The idea that Hofmann may have been forging documents to sell or trade
was not necessarily a new concept at the end of 1985. Christensen,
Metcalfe, Ashworth, the Tanners, plenty of people close to Hofmann, or
even just in Mormon historical circles, were beginning to question the
legitimacy of some of Hofmann’s miraculous finds. The problem was, as it
had always been, nobody knew the extent to which Hofmann had influenced
the world of Mormon history.

As soon as public discourse began to question if Hofmann was a forger or
not, it put a hold on any deals that involved Mormon documents.
Overnight, any deals that Hofmann was in the middle of evaporated. He
was still on the hook for nearly $3 mn of today’s dollars to pay out to
multiple entities, but after the bombs went off, he was out of a job,
and the primary suspect of two murders; as a result, people were quickly
turning hostile against him.

The Bureau of ATF were involved with the local Police Department to find
all the links to Hofmann and the bombs possible. Because it involved
millions of dollars and forgeries, the FBI also stepped in, bringing
never before seen attention to nice little Salt Lake City. The news
cycle exploded with articles like we read in the last episode. People
everywhere were hearing the story of bombs going off in Salt Lake City,
some were saying it was organized crime from investors that had lost $5
mn in CFS investments. Others heard that the bombs were somehow related
to Mormon history, but what about Mormon history would cause somebody to
kill two people with bombs? Only the small number of people on the
inside of this story were aware of what was going on with the documents
Hofmann was selling, and out of those people, a very small number
actually thought he was the forger and bomb maker. It’s hard to convey
just how confusing and perplexing the situation was when this story
broke into the main stream, and everybody was talking about it, which
made the confusion even worse.

The hushed whispers that were spoken among a few document collectors
that Hofmann might not be all that trustworthy, rose to audible
murmurings running rampant throughout the Mormon historical community.
Articles coming from the Deseret news during this time are amazing.
Often times it doesn’t seem like we put enough stock into local
reporting, historically its shown to be more reliable because it
captures what it was like to be there when the story happened. During
the next few days of the Deseret News, a murder mystery unfolds in
living color. It’s great to watch a movie unfold a mystery plot over an
hour and a half, but this was real life with real newspaper articles.
Real people had died and real people might still be in danger.

Here are some headlines and summaries of the next few days in the
Church-owned Deseret News.

**Police Focus on evidence, not theories:**

“Theories of conspiracies, elaborate forgeries and hundred-thousand
dollar payoffs may make interesting reading, but police say they are
more interested in solving two murders.

Investigators are downplaying media reports that documents found in
Hofmann’s car and home may have been forgeries. In fact, most
investigators refused to even comment on reports forged documents may be
the motive behind the Tuesday killings of Steven Christensen, 31, a
prominent collector of Mormon historical documents, and Kathy Webb
Sheets, 50, wife of Christensen’s business associate.”

**Killings entail classic motives**

Money, revenge, secrets may be part of S.L. ‘murder mystery’

This one contemplates some possible motives.

“A murder mystery, possibly with all the classic motives – forgery,
large sums of money, revenge and secret documents – is unraveling now in
the bomb killings of two Salt Lakers earlier this week and the severe
injury of another.

**No fiction writer could come up with stranger scenarios or plots.**

The ultimate motive for the killings will not surface until a prosecutor
faces a jury and lays out a plausible scenario. Here are some of the
possibilities:

\--Murder to cover up forgeries or possible forgeries. Material in
Hofmann’s car lead police to believe that he had been practicing forging
documents.

\--Murder to avenge a broken business deal or eliminate a middle-man who
would want a cut of the action.

\--Murder to eliminate Christensen, then bomb plantings (or attempted
plantings) to divert attention from any connection to Mormon documents
and toward CFS Financial Corp., the troubled investment firm in which
Sheets and Christensen were officers.”

It continues on:

“To be honest,” said Brent Metcalfe, whom Christensen hired to research
the Harris letter, “the only thing the White Salamander letter has to do
with the case is that it introduced Mark to Steve.”

Metcalfe, whom Christensen paid to research the Harris letter, knew
Christensen, Hofmann and Sheets well. Devastated by Christensen’s death,
he said, he vacillated between the two motives – CFS business dealings
or historical document trafficking – but worried about himself and his
friends’ safety because of their connections to Christensen and Sheets.

Wednesday he stopped by Signature Books to see friends, and someone told
him a car had been bombed at the LDS Church Office Building. “It didn’t
make sense because none of us can park there.”

Metcalfe called a reporter at the SLT, he said, who told him the car was
parked near the Deseret Gym and checked the report as to the color and
make.

I said, “That’s the same as Mark’s. I’ve got to get over there.”

Metcalfe said he drove there and saw the car, but his friend had been
taken away. “I grabbed a policeman and told him who I was. He called a
detective who told me my life might be in danger and took me into
protective custody. I was just shaking, just falling apart.’”

This is from another article “**Hofmann also traded important documents
of American history**”

It talks about the Oath of a Freeman for 12 paragraphs then quotes an
anonymous source in saying: “Another source said in addition to the
“Oath of a Freeman,” Hofmann has collected letters from some important
early American figures that he planned to sell including documents
written by Edgar Allan Poe and Abraham Lincoln.

Hofmann dealt heavily in early American books and documents “The Mormon
stuff is probably only 20 percent of his business activities,” the
source said.”

Whether we can trust that or not doesn’t seem to matter for our
purposes. Point is, rumors were circulating about just how far and wide
Hofmann’s forgeries had infected history. People holding documents they
had bought from Hofmann or one of his affiliates were suddenly faced
with the possibility that they were holding something that was
essentially worthless. That being said, the church was still under the
impression that the Salamander letter was real. Whether or not Hofmann
was dealing in forgeries, the church had invested a lot of time and even
more money into verifying the legitimacy of the Salamander letter, and
they weren’t so excited to walk back and say it was all on a fake
document. What’s more is they had invested apologetics resources into
justifying the letter with their own narrative. That’s where the big
investment came in that they didn’t want to embrace as a useless
investment. They had spoken in general conference about the Salamander
letter, they had released dozens of articles in the Deseret News about
it. Dean Jessee had written his treatise on the legitimacy of the
letter; the church was locked into a sunk-cost relationship with this
cancerous Salamander Letter, and it was eating countless church
resources and still causing members to leave. The church still wasn’t
sure what to do with the Salamander letter.

On the 20<sup>th</sup>, another person was arrested under suspicion of
being Hofmann’s accomplice. A man named Shannon Patrick Flynn was
suspected of association with Hofmann in his criminal dealings. Also,
the Uzi that He and Hofmann owned was found in Flynn’s possession. They
had converted the Uzi to fully automatic which is a maximum penalty of
10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine. Flynn was arrested while Hofmann
was recovering at LDS hospital, and he made the $50,000 bail two days
later. When the police searched his home, they found a copy of The
Anarchist’s Cookbook, which has many step-by-step recipes to making
bombs. Whether Hofmann needed the cookbook to make the pipe bombs or not
is unknown, but mere possession of the book along with the Uzi was
enough for police to connect the dots, which landed Flynn in jail. He
would later be acquitted of any prosecution because links between him
and Hofmann were circumstantial business deals at best.

Over the next few weeks, people everywhere volunteered cooperation with
the FBI, ATF, and local police officials to piece the Hofmann case
together.

| 19 October 1985 | Church announces Harris letter was given to FBI to authenticate. The FBI tests did not indicate forgery. Second search of Hofmann home conducted. |  |  |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 21 October 1985 | Elder Hugh Pinnock releases details of his role in obtaining a loan for Hofmann.                                                                  |  |  |
| 23 October 1985 | In a news conference, Elders Hinckley, Oaks, and Pinnock give details about their contacts with Hofmann.                                          |  |  |
| 25 October 1985 | Elder Pinnock repays Hofmann's loan to First Interstate Bank.                                                                                     |  |  |
| 30 October 1985 | Information from Rendell says papyrus Hofmann tried to peddle was from him, not part of any McLellin collection.                                  |  |  |

People were coming out of the woodwork everywhere to try and absolve
themselves of any guilt in connection with Hofmann and the bombs. When
the FBI began investigating the insular society of deep Mormon history,
they found names and institutions that kept coming up. Lyn Jacobs, Brent
Metcalfe, Brent Ashworth, Gordon B. Hinckley, J Schiller company in New
York. The government officials gathered as much evidence as they
possibly could from every source they possibly could.

We have the benefit of seeing these things play out in hindsight. We can
look back at this, 30 years after it happened, with the eye of an
overseer, and understand what was happening. Granted, there is a bit of
historical fog as to what it must have felt like to be one of these
people with articles circulating about you being connected to Hofmann
through business deals, we can’t understand what that must have felt
like. But, we know what happened, and we have the benefit of near
historical omniscience when it comes to the Hofmann timeline. For the
people that were experiencing this in real time though, it was a very
different reality for them. They had the fog of unknown future events to
cloud their judgement and actions. For all they knew, another bomb could
go off any day and kill somebody else that was associated with Mormon
history, people were on the edge of their seats for weeks while these
events played out.

| 31 October 1985 | Hofmann released from LDS Hospital. Later in the day he is charged with illegal possession of a machine gun. He pleads innocent and posts a $50,000 bail. A Daniel Boone letter \[1 April 1775\] sold at a Sotheby's auction for $31,900. The letter was a Hofmann creation. Sotheby's later buys letter back. |  |  |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| November 1985   | Grand Jury hears from people who dealt with Hofmann. No charges filed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |  |  |

The same thing the police had charged Shannon Patrick Flynn with,
possession of the Uzi, they arrested Hofmann for. The same day, he posts
the $50,000 bail, just as Flynn had done a week before. Hofmann was a
flight risk and there was a pending investigation of him as the primary
suspect in the bombings. The police took his passport and placed him on
a travel restriction for fear he would flee the country. They also
placed surveillance squads on Hofmann to track his movement, when you’re
a prime suspect in the heinous deaths of two people, you lose a lot of
freedoms.

Then, something remarkable happened. There are small communities online
and probably in some books somewhere that posit conspiracy theories that
claim Hofmann as a fall guy for a larger conspiracy. What happened next
is one piece of evidence they will often claim as supporting evidence
for such conspiracies. I said last episode that I don’t espouse any of
these theories, I think the historical record surrounding Hofmann as we
widely understand it is probably mostly reliable, but I do take a bit of
pause at what happened next.

|  |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------- |  |  |
| 13 November 1985 | Hofmann takes polygraph test. |  |  |

You may be saying, well, he took a polygraph test, there’s our silver
bullet, you nail him down on the polygraph and admit the results as
evidence in court, bam you got your conviction, everybody goes home,
bad-guy goes to jail for eternity and we all sleep better at night
knowing a lunatic is off the streets.

Unfortunately, things aren’t quite so cut and dried. Polygraphs tests
aren’t 100% accurate, in fact many critics claim they’re less accurate
than chance and have different levels of effectiveness for different
personality types. They can also be more effective when asking details
of a crime as opposed to asking straight-forward if the person committed
the crime, like they would expect.

For example, if a person is being polygraph tested for petty theft, the
examiner will often avoid the question of “Did you steal the money?”
until the end of the examination. The more pertinent question is “Was
the stolen money in the amount of $100, $500, or $2,000?” which causes
more stimulation on the graph when the person knows the specifics of the
crime. This is also why polygraph results are only occasionally admitted
as evidence in a court. To dive into this deeper, the argument can be
made that polygraphs are nothing more than antiquated relics of 1920’s
pseudo-science that don’t actually hold any relevance to real detective
work. It’s the person conducting the polygraph that determines if a
person is lying or not, not necessarily the machine itself. The
psychological effects of the polygraph machine combined with a stoic and
intimidating person conducting the 90-minute question and answer session
is what determines whether or not a person is lying. It’s not so much
the machine, but the polygraphist that can tell when a person is lying.

But, it needs to be said, people are capable of fooling polygraphs. The
polygraph measures physiological changes during a person’s answer to any
given question. When a person lies, their stress level increases, which
the polygraph measures by checking their breathing, heart rate, and
conductivity of their skin to measure sweat levels. Hofmann was a
habitual liar; we know that from the many deals he orchestrated with
nothing but his own lies backing them up. Somebody like Hofmann, who
lies constantly, is capable of suppressing those tells that most honest
people exhibit while lying. That makes sense, right? Somebody who lies
all the time is practiced at doing so and can fool the polygraph into
thinking they aren’t lying. Famously, the green river killer, Gary
Ridgeway; Charles Cullen, a serial killer, and plenty of other high
level criminals, fooled multiple polygraph tests that were designed to
catch these people lying. The polygraph is ill-equipped to identify
hardened liars like these men. Hofmann, just like others before and
after him, fooled the polygraph test. He didn’t show signs of lying when
asked critical questions about the bombings.

A normal modern polygraph test will issue a degree of certainty in its
findings. It will say that the test subject was lying during a given
question with a percent degree of confidence. If somebody exhibits signs
of lying when asked a question, the polygraph will say that it measured
spikes in the readings indicative of lying during this question with an
85% level of confidence. Not only was Hofmann able to confuse the
polygraph into less than a 50% level of confidence, but when he was
asked the questions of did you kill the people in the bombing of October
15<sup>th</sup>, and we’re you in the judge building that morning in a
green jacket dropping off a package, he was able to fool them into a
false degree of negative response. The polygraph said that Hofmann
specifically wasn’t lying when he blatantly said he had nothing to do
with the bombings. On November 13<sup>th</sup>, Hofmann took and passed
the polygraph, and by November 20<sup>th</sup>, his attorney had issued
statements that he had passed a polygraph, which came into conflict with
the case the police were building. Also, the police didn’t find any
actual bomb-making equipment in Hofmann’s home. I believe I said that
they did last episode, but I was only going off the news articles that
were reporting such information, the only bomb-making materials the
police found in Hofmann’s possession were some surgical gloves and some
metal pipe in the trunk of his blown up car.

This is from the Deseret News Nov. 20<sup>th</sup>, 1985. It’s a long
one, but there is a ton of relevant information in it, so I’m going to
read the majority of it. Be sure to follow the link in the show notes to
see a photocopy of the paper for yourself.

READ DN article
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC\&dat=19851120\&printsec=frontpage\&hl=en

Things were confusing to say the least. Like I said earlier, today, we
have the benefit of knowing what happens. We can view this through the
lens where the conclusion is already understood and Hofmann is already
in jail serving life + 20, but back when this article was written,
everything was up in the air. The possibility that Hofmann wasn’t guilty
and that the bomber was still at large began to scare some people that
had become comforted by the mounting evidence that Hofmann was the
bomber. Now this evidence comes out that he passed the polygraph test
and that officials couldn’t necessarily put Hofmann in a location where
he could have manufactured the bombs, and people once again started to
get a little uneasy.

The end of the article introduced something that is very challenging to
wrap my mind around. It said that the justices of the Utah Supreme Court
will hear an appeal of a court order to subpoena Hofmann’s nurse to
inquire concerning a conversation she overheard between Hofmann and his
attorney. This is walking some very fine ethical lines here. There are
attorney client privileges that protect information exchanged between
attorneys and clients. There is also doctor-patient confidentiality that
protects any information exchanged between doctors and patients. But,
there is nothing saying that information a nurse overheard in a
conversation is subject to any of these protections. This nurse may have
overheard Hofmann talking to his attorney about how to play the legal
game until a plea bargain is proposed, or she may have heard something
about Hofmann being framed and the real bomber still being out there. We
will unfortunately never know what she overheard, because her testimony
wasn’t admitted to the court as evidence.

The justices walked a very fine line in this decision. Do you admit her
testimony as evidence and open pandora’s box to any nurse being
subpoenaed into court about a conversation they overheard, or do you
ignore her testimony and try to build a case based on hard evidence?
What if Hofmann really wasn’t guilty and she overheard the name of the
real bomber that was still at large? Her lack of testimony in the court
may get an innocent man convicted and let a guilty murderer roam the
streets. But if she were subpoenaed to court and gave her testimony, it
could just be wholly disregarded as heresay and from then on, all nurses
need to worry about what they’ve heard their patients talking about.
Once again, you walk some fine ethical lines here. In my opinion, the
Utah Supreme Court made the right decision in not hearing her testimony
during the trial. They had enough hard evidence, that didn’t rely on
overhearing something in conversation, to convict Hofmann, and I think
they made a good move.

While the FBI, ATF, and local police were investigating the bombings and
amassing evidence for a conviction, the investigation into Hofmann’s
documents as forgeries ramped up. There was an overwhelming
preponderance of evidence in Hofmann’s home that he was forging old
documents, and now they needed to find out just how deep the tendrils of
his fraud had extended.

| 17-20 Dec. 1985 | First examination: George Throckmorton and William Flynn begin their investigation of historic documents at the LDS Church Historical Department. They discover cracked ink on documents that Hofmann handled, but they are not sure what caused it.                      |  |  |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 7-20 Jan. 1986  | Second examination in LDS Historical Department by Throckmorton and Flynn. About this time the FBI lab in Washington D.C. reports that its tests had determined that the Harris 1830 letter was not a forgery. Neither was the 1829 printing contract for Book of Mormon. |  |  |
| 22 January 1986 | Third examination by Throckmorton and Flynn, joined by Al Lyter. Exam takes place in the Utah State Crime Lab.                                                                                                                                                            |  |  |
| 9 January 1986  | Terri Christensen delivers Steven Fred Christensen, Jr. by cesarean section. It would have been Steve's thirty-second birthday.                                                                                                                                           |  |  |

What I’m about to read is an extract from UTLM.org. A link will be in
the show notes, but basically it goes through a series of quotes from
George Throckmorton and William Flynn from various sources quoting what
they found wrong with Hofmann’s work as they studied his documents
increasingly.

“Document examiners, of course, did find the common denominator between
the Salamander letter and the other forgeries in the ink. William Flyn
testified: "The...Martin Harris-W.W. Phelps letter also is one of the
documents that has the extensive surface cracking of the ink that I have
talked about several times now." The *Deseret News* for May 12, 1986,
reported:

    "A Utah documents expert has given additional testimony that the
controversial Martin Harris letter—better known as the 'White Salamander
Letter'—is a forgery....

    "The Martin Harris letter Hofmann claimed to have discovered was
different in two respects, Throckmorton said Monday. First, after it was
folded, it was still possible to look inside and read the letter; and
second, the sealing wax was in the extreme right-hand corner, not the
center of the document.

    "The suspicious cut marks on the Harris letter also were discovered
on several other documents Hofmann claimed to have discovered,...

    "Throckmorton said the suspicious cut marks were discovered only on
documents Hofmann said he discovered and not on any of the other
documents he examined....

    "Throckmorton also testified about the unusual cracking effect
exhibited in the ink on Hofmann's documents. He said he personally
examined 688 documents and that 21 showed microscopic ink cracking. Mark
Hofmann was the source of all 21 documents....

    "Throckmorton added he had never seen the ink cracking phenomenon
before and was unaware of similar ink cracking on any legitimate
historical documents. After examining hundreds of documents, the expert
said, the phenomenon was apparent only in those documents Hofmann
claimed to have discovered."

    William Flyn testified that he did not believe that the writing on
the document "is authentic writing from that time period." Mr. Flyn also
said: "The paper itself appears to be genuine period paper. The writing
itself does not appear to be genuine writing of that time period." Flyn
also noted that "One edge of the document had been cut." He said the cut
"probably \[was done\] with the scissors. It's an irregular cut."

  Kenneth Rendell said that when he originally examined the Salamander
letter he noticed it was not folded in the way normal cover letters were
folded, but he felt that this in itself would not cause him to reject
the letter's authenticity. He did state, however, that "There's no
logical reason that this letter is folded in the way that it is."

  Throckmorton and Flyn seem to feel that the peculiar way that the
letter is folded and the evidence of cutting on the side may indicate
that the paper used for the Salamander letter came from a larger sheet
of old paper.”

 http://www.utlm.org/onlinebooks/trackingch6b.htm\#SALAMANDER LETTER

Once they found the tell, Hofmann’s forgeries could be seen from a mile
away. It was a matter of looking at the ink at a very specific
magnification on a microscope that showed cracking. This was the single
point where Hofmann’s forgeries could be picked out from a group of
documents and be identified without a shadow of a doubt.

However, we run into some problems here. We know any document that
Hofmann handled that was purchased or traded during a certain window of
time with a certain ink on certain paper that has certain cracking at a
certain magnification, is a definite forgery, but that sentence excludes
a lot of possibilities. When the police went through Hofmann’s basement,
they found multiple vials of different inks, scraps of old paper from
multiple sources, and even found some pages of a Book of Mormon Hofmann
was working on, possibly the 116 pages supposedly written by Martin
Harris. There’s also no telling how much inventory Hofmann moved, we
don’t know how many documents he bought or sold, we aren’t even sure
of what year he began making these, we don’t know all of the inks he
used, or where he found all the source paper.

Given that we can positively identify these documents found in that
small window, it leaves a lot of time and materials Hofmann could have
manufactured that have yet to come to light. Hofmann may have
manufactured plenty of old documents that don’t have the cracked ink,
thus making them even harder to detect than the Salamander letter was.

In thinking about the implications of this, I went diving back down a
rabbit hole I haven’t been to in well over a year now. Out of curiosity,
I looked back into the historical veracity of the Justice Neely court
document that calls Joseph Smith “The Glass Looker”. I was fascinated by
this when I looked into it for research on Episode 12 of the show, but
there was a fair amount of nuance that I had completely forgotten.

I came to question how we know the Neely bill to be real. As the story
goes, in 1971, Reverend Wesley P. Walters was rooting around in the
basement of the county jail in Norwich, New York. While reading
documents and digging through files, Walters, and his friend Fred
Poffarl discovered a piece of paper that had Justice Neely’s bill for
$2.68 for the trial of Joseph Smith “The Glass Looker” on March
20<sup>th</sup>, 1826. It’s one single piece of paper unfortunately, not
Neely’s entire docket book like historians would hope, but it is one
piece of paper that these guys claim they found in the basement of the
jail.

If you read through UTLM’s piece about the document, they go through how
the document reads exactly as we would expect. The dollar amount is
exactly correct, the other names on other trials Neely heard that day
match up with the historical record. The document checks out as being
legitimate.

This discovery happened in 1971, when Hofmann was 15, so I don’t think
he forged the document, but what if Walters did and then just claimed he
found it in the basement. The pedigree for the document is basically and
affidavit that these guys found it randomly. The pedigree for the Anthon
transcript, that Hofmann essentially made his name with, was much more
established than he just found it in a basement. Everything on the
Anthon transcript is just like we would expect it to be, and Hofmann had
convinced a woman to sign an affidavit stating that Hofmann had bought a
bible from her Mom that the transcript was conveniently inside of. Most
of Hofmann’s documents were just as well substantiated as the document
that Walters found. Walters knew that a bill from Albert Neely might
exist, and found what he was looking for. Hofmann knew that an Anthon
Transcript might exist, and he reportedly found what he was looking for
as well.

Point is, I’m not so sure the Neely bill is as trustworthy as I
originally thought. I have no reason to think it was manufactured by
Wesley Walters, nor do I have any expertise or qualifications to
question or verify the document as legitimate, I’m merely pointing out
the similarities between the Neely bill and many of Hofmann’s documents
and how hard it is to actually determine legitimacy. If a forgery is
good enough, it can pass a lot of tests, just like all of Hofmann’s work
had done for half a decade before the bombs went off.

I think I’ve tracked down the primary problem with verifying these
documents, and that is cost. It costed $6,000 for the initial
investigation into the Salamander letter by Kenneth Rendell; Christensen
and Hofmann split the bill because it was their transaction. Kenneth
Rendell was just an old documents examiner, not a chemist or forensics
examiner, he could only look at the paper and handwriting and say it
doesn’t look like a forgery. $6,000, even back then, was a bargain for
doing an in-depth examination of the Salamander Letter by a licensed and
well-practiced documents expert.

George Throckmorton and William Flyn examined the Salamander letter and
others of Hofmann’s works because it was their job. It was a legal case
the prosecution was bringing against Hofmann, and these men were hired
to examine the documents by the state. Who knows what their bills were
to the state for conducting such exhaustive and thorough analyses on
hundreds of documents.

Throckmorton and Flyn found the cracking in the ink, but that wasn’t the
only analysis that was done to prove this was a forgery. I have to give
a shoutout to my friend Professor Stephen for helping me understand what
we’re about to discuss, you can hear his voice as cohost of the
currently on hiatus atheists on air. Professor Stephen has been working
in the field of mass spectrometry for years now, and he is a very good
chemical science communicator. He gave me a brief rundown of how
electron microscopes work and how they were used to age the ink on the
Salamander letter paper.

Basically, it requires shooting electrons at a surface, and tracking how
they bounce off the thing you’re examining. It creates a nearly perfect
image of the item at a molecular level and also tells what kinds of
atoms the electrons present in the thing you’re looking at. This is a
very simplistic version, so please excuse my own lack of understanding
with the description here.

One man, named Roderick J. McNeil conducted a study on thousands of old
documents. Using Scanning auger microscopy, McNeil found that iron atoms
in ink tend to leech into the paper as it ages. So when ink is first put
on paper, the iron atoms are more concentrated. As years progress,
however, those iron atoms migrate and basically soak into the paper, for
lack of better terms.

To get into the nitty gritty here, over time the iron atoms migrate
1/2000ths of an inch over 1000 years to the paper. So if you look at a
word on a piece of paper through an electron microscope once and then
wait another 1000 years and look again, the iron atoms will have moved
1/2000<sup>th</sup> of an inch. An electron microscope can easily
measure where on this 1000-year timeframe the ink is in relation to the
paper, because the method of measurement is so incredibly precise.
Hofmann used Iron-gall ink, which was in common use in the 1830’s and he
had to basically make his own ink that would fit with the timeframe in
which the documents were written.

Well, in 1984, a study was conducted to date old documents by this
Roderick J. McNeil guy. He took thousands of documents from 1200 to 1972
and graded their deterioration on a curve that has held true for over 30
years since the study was conducted. For technical purposes and if you
want to look it up, the study was called: “Scanning Auger Microscopy for
Dating Manuscript Inks,” there will be a link to the original study in
the show notes.

There’s a lot of great information in the study, and this is where I
really have to thank Professor Stephen because he read through it and
shared the highlights. To put it short, it’s a very reliable technique,
some considering it virtually infallible in dating ink. With every
document he examined, he did so 10 times in different locations to make
sure the tests were precise. He achieved a 90% accuracy rating in the
study and was able to date documents with a plus or minus 2.2-year
margin of error. The older stuff tested from all the way back in 1050
proved a little more challenging, McNeil was only able to date plus or
minus 30 years, so the accuracy moves along a curve, but still, this is
insanely accurate for chemically aging ink on documents. Look into the
book detecting forgery by Joe Nickell. It apparently goes through the
entire process and how it was used to determine that the Howard Hughes
autobiography by Clifford Irving was a forgery, as well as details work
done on various Hofmann documents that showed themselves as forgeries
once examined with this microscopy technique.

You might say, well if Hofmann would have used old iron to mix the ink,
it would have aged proportionately with the paper and would have passed
that test, but that’s not what this test does. It doesn’t date the ink
itself, it dates how long the ink has been in contact with the paper
with an accuracy of plus or minus 2.2 years, accurate when used on
documents from current up to 800 years ago.

Roderick examined the Salamander letter in mid-1986 and concluded the
ink hadn’t been on the paper any time before 1970. McNeil had used the
science of Scanning Auger Microscopy to perform the massive document
dating study in 1984, and 2 years later, his scientific technique was
used as evidence to convict Hofmann and others of fraud. That is a
science win and pretty awesome if you ask me.

The dramatic irony here is the fact that Roderick McNeil developed the
technique to try and prove the shroud of turin to be real, which he’s
published two books about. That study was inconclusive for some reason…
It should also be pointed out that the technique used and McNeil’s study
are still widely used today in document forensics. It’s not like the guy
is a quack, he conducted some real hard science that I just did a
terrible job of explaining, that’s still in use today.

The overall point that got us into talking about document aging is cost.
We’re talking about a lack of resources being a problem in determining
forgeries. McNeil had access to an electron microscope and his body of
work, work that had probably cost his funding agency an obscene amount
of money to conduct. Even the microscope or a mass spectrometer alone
were probably a few hundred thousand dollars. In order to get an expert
like McNeil or Throckmorton to do research, and use extremely advanced
equipment to do so, somebody has to pay them, and you can be sure that
the $6,000 that paid Rendell to examine the Salamander Letter wouldn’t
fund 45 minutes of these guys’ work. Now we begin to open up a huge
discussion about ethics and money. Who pays for McNeil to look at every
Mormon document to determine if it’s real or fake? Who determines what
documents McNeil should examine and what documents aren’t important
enough to be examined? If we ran every prominent historical document
through this study, what might that reveal about the historical record
that we’ve taken for granted for so long? See, these are big questions
with no easy answers. Questions that require discussion at some other
time, possibly in some other place, but for now, let’s get back to
Hofmann here and try to advance his storyline through 1986. The evidence
was really mounting and his collapsed house of cards was lying in a
motionless heap as people rooted through his past to uncover his crimes.

<http://files.lib.byu.edu/ead/XML/MSS1571.xml>

| 4 February 1986  | Prosecutors charge Hofmann with two murder counts, twenty-three counts of theft by deception and communications fraud involving, among others, the Anthon Transcript, Harris Letter, and nonexistent McLellin Collection. Hofmann goes to Salt Lake County Jail.              |  |  |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 5 February 1986  | Probable cause statement released, listing Hofmann documents involved in fraud counts. Investigator George Throckmorton says none of documents described are authentic.                                                                                                       |  |  |
| 7 February 1986  | Rendell says several Hofmann documents are forgeries, but he is not sure about Harris letter. Prominent LDS historians, with only media reports about case for fraud to counter earlier reports showing authenticity, maintain view that some of the documents are authentic. |  |  |
| 9 February 1986  | Hofmann released on $250,000 bail.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |  |  |
| 11 February 1986 | *Salt Lake Tribune* quotes James R. Dibowski, former director of US Postal Crime Lab in Cincinnati, contending Joseph Smith III blessing document was genuine.                                                                                                                |  |  |
| April 1986       | Prosecutors examine forty witnesses to collect evidence to build their case against Hofmann.                                                                                                                                                                                  |  |  |
| 1 April 1986     | Church announces it is returning court documents received from Hofmann to Hancock County, Illinois. The announcement also lists 48 documents acquired from Hofmann, 41 by donation or trade, and 7 purchased for $57,100.                                                     |  |  |
| 4 April 1986     | Hofmann charged with four additional theft by deception counts.                                                                                                                                                                                                               |  |  |
| 11 April 1986    | George Throckmorton examines a second copy of â€œOath of a Freemanâ€ loaned to police by Wilding. He says it is a fake printed from a negative made in Salt Lake City.                                                                                                       |  |  |

Everything came crashing down here. Not only the church, but plenty of
collectors were coming out of the woodwork claiming they had done
business with Hofmann. Maybe they purchased a couple of signatures from
him, maybe a Deseret banking note, or a land deed. Maybe they traded a
poem or some old books for a single important document. Damage had been
done. Damage to the Mormon historical record at an incomprehensible
level had been wreaked upon the trusting minds and pocket-books of
people involved in that world. Deals had been made and possessions had
changed hands. How would you feel if you had purchased something from a
document dealer for $10k, only to find out that he had picked it up in a
trade from a guy who had purchased it along with other letters, who had
purchased it from another guy, who had acquired it through a trade from
Mark Hofmann? Well, a lot of people had these documents that originally
came from Hofmann, but didn’t find out about the line of possession the
document had experienced, to know it was from Hofmann in the first
place.

Now we begin to ask more ethical questions. Who pays back everybody in
that line for the forgery? Who loses money because they bought the
forgery, and if they got it in a trade, who gets what book or document
back in what trade when a Hofmann forgery is in the mix? Was it the
responsibility of every single person who had ever dealt with Hofmann to
come forward and offer up their documents to be tested for legitimacy,
and who pays for the thousands of hours of testing necessary to identify
forgeries? Was it those person’s responsibility to track down every
single document they ever bought from Hofmann to let the buyer know that
they may have purchased a forgery? Brent Ashworth claimed Hofmann sold
him $225,000 worth of forgeries, who pays him back for that? Hofmann was
responsible for a small chunk of the debt that required CFS to file for
bankruptcy being $5mn in debt to its investors, who pays for all the
damage done with CFS? The LDS Church had returned the Book of
Commandments they got in trade for the Joseph Smith III Blessing to the
RLDS church, so that was a relatively simple way to reverse the damage
done, but the majority of other trades weren’t that simple. These are
some complicated situations all stemming from the damage Hofmann did in
a mere 6 years’ time.

| 14 April 1986 | Preliminary hearing in the case of*The State of Utah vs. Mark W. Hofmann* begins.                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |  |  |
| 18 April 1986 | Investigators show that Hofmann used â€œMike Hansenâ€ alias and that Mike Hansen bought bomb ingredients and engraved plates used to print some documents sold by Hofmann.                                              |  |  |
| 18 April 1986 | Former LDS Church Archivist Don Schmidt testifies that Church took few steps to authenticate documents obtained from Hofmann, indicating that most documents were examined solely on basis of their historical contexts. |  |  |
| 20 April 1986 | LDS Church announced that forty-eight documents were purchased or otherwise obtained from Hofmann. The Church paid Hofmann $57,100 for seven items, the other forty-one were acquired by donation or trade.              |  |  |
| 23 April 1986 | Hofmann reinjured his knee; falling and fracturing his kneecap. Hearing postponed until 5 May.                                                                                                                           |  |  |

The realm of Mormon history was reeling at these revelations that the
church had purchased or traded to Hofmann so many documents and other
items. We’re talking a lot of money given to buy forgeries, possibly for
the sake of suppressing them, and the church had to come out and say
publicly they had been so wildly duped by Hofmann. These men that are
prophets, seers, and revelators, that are incapable of leading the
church astray and have the power of discernment, had been fooled by a
sophisticated con-man.

| May 1986   | *Brigham Young University Studies* special issue focuses on tests the Harris and Smith letters had been subjected to and on issues raised by the letters, including treasure hunting in and before Joseph Smith's time, based on non-Hofmann sources.                                                                                                                                |  |  |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |  |  |
| 3 May 1986 | Mormon History Association Annual Meetings, Salt Lake City. Special Session on Early Mormon History. Papers by Ronald Walker and Alan Taylor later published in*Dialogue*19 (Winter 1986). At the same meetings Richard Lloyd Anderson makes a slide-lecture presentation on the Joseph Smith to Hyrum Smith Revelation-Letter \[May 1838\] showing the problems with the post mark. |  |  |

All of these documents were being openly discussed by historians in and
out of the church. The Salamander letter was still being questioned and
talks about examining other Hofmann documents were surfacing. Oddly
though, talks about the McLellin collection seem absent from what I’ve
been reading lately. The McLellin collection was really Hofmann’s
Achilles heel, it was the final straw that broke him, and after talks
about the papyri from the McLellin collection had died off, anybody
talking about the whole collection surfacing seemed occupied with
everything else that was going on.

| 7 May 1986       | William Flynn, investigator for Arizona State Crime Lab, announces cracked ink proves Harris letter and other Hofmann documents were forged.                                                                                                          |  |  |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 22 May 1986      | Hofmann bound over to Utah Third District Court for trial on charges of murder and fraud. On 6 June he pleads not guilty to all charges. Judges rule that Hofmann would face five separate trials; the first, for murder, scheduled for 2 March 1987. |  |  |
| 24 May 1986      | Unanswered questions, including how Hofmann passed polygraph test, remain after preliminary hearings end. Based on what public has been told, many people still reluctant to agree with prosecution's case.                                           |  |  |
| Summer/Fall 1986 | Roderick McNeil uses a scanning auger microscope to examine the age of the ink on the documents Hofmann sold to the Church. He concludes that none were written before 1970.                                                                          |  |  |
| 16 October 1986  | Church announces that a search of its archives and First Presidency's vault found no Oliver Cowdery history.                                                                                                                                          |  |  |

This is a very interesting press release. The Oliver Cowdery history was
a rumor the church just couldn’t kill. Since the rumor was popularized
in May of 1985 that the church was hiding the Oliver Cowdery history, no
amount of press releases could satisfy the public’s salivation for that
document. Add in the fact that less than a month before Hofmann told the
press that the church is hiding the Oliver Cowdery history that the
church was hiding the existence of the 1825 Smith-Stowell letter, and
public trust of the Church’s statements was at an all-time low. If they
were hiding something as small as a business contract between Joseph’s
father and Josiah Stowell, why wouldn’t they hide something as
incriminating as the Cowdery history that credits Alvin Smith with
finding the gold plates instead of Joseph Smith? That seems like a
legitimate question even today… Let’s read a bit from that press release
and see what we can glean from it. There is a link to this archived
photocopy newspaper for October 16, 1986 in the show notes, follow it to
page B-1 to find the story from which I’m reading.

READ DN Cowdery History
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC&dat=19861016&printsec=frontpage&hl=en>

They sure seemed pretty emphatic when it came to denying they had this
history in their possession, or even that it exists. I’m not really sure
how to interpret this, and my own biases of distrusting the church are
probably clouding my judgement, but when a child tells you
straight-forward that they didn’t draw on the wall, in fact, they don’t
even have a marker that’s the color of the writing that’s on the wall,
it seems a little spurious. If a large company emphatically claims in
public statements that it’s not doing any underhanded business deals in
Panama, it may be a good idea to check their books. If the government
says that it’s doing things for your protection, and you see a newspaper
article that presents evidence that they funded terrorist activities in
Nicaragua, Afghanistan, and other places, the first claim seems a little
spurious. See the same newspaper article in the show links for what I
was just referring to.

My point is, if Hofmann claimed that the church had something that they
didn’t want to share, he was usually able to make that claim and have it
backed up by reality, because he had personally manufactured and sold or
traded it to them. I made this point last episode, Hofmann didn’t just
recklessly try to make the church look foolish, he was calculated in
doing so, and I would think he wouldn’t have leaked to the press that
the Cowdery history exists if it didn’t exist. My research has led me to
believe the church has the Cowdery history, probably penned by Hofmann
himself, and is continuing to suppress it, inflicting a massive
disservice to the Mormon historical community, and barring us from
unearthing another Hofmann document. The church was claiming very
emphatically that they didn’t have the Cowdery history, and Hofmann was
behind bars, unable to construct any elaborate scenario to force their
hand, as he had done many times in the past. It makes me wonder what
else the church may have locked away in their vaults that are nothing
more than Hofmann forgeries…

But, of course, this is my own personal opinion, heavily influenced by
the research I’ve done so far. I chose not to trust church officials and
historians at their word because I’ve been burned by doing so in the
past. I personally haven’t been through the archives like they have, nor
have I seen the president’s vault like they have, so I’m the much less
informed party in this circumstance.

Let’s finish with Hofmann’s timeline here. In early October of 1986, the
Tanners of UTLM released the first copy of “Tracking the White
Salamander,” which has been my primary source for so much of what’s gone
into the research for Hofmann. If all the forensic and authorship
analyses hadn’t done it in by this point, publishing this book was the
final nail in the Salamander Letter’s coffin. It put everything to rest
and detailed so much of Hofmann’s work and his interactions with the
Tanner’s.

Finally, by late 1986, Hofmann threw in the towel.

| Early Dec. 1986  | Defense attorney Yengich and Prosecutor Stott begin open discussions about a plea bargain.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |  |  |
| 7 January 1987   | Plea bargain agreed to.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  |  |
| 7-8 January 1987 | Stott and David Biggs drive to Yengich's home in Salt Lake City. Hofmann confesses his crimes to them.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |  |  |
| 22 January 1987  | Yengich forces Mark Hofmann to confront his family with his guilt.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |  |  |
| 23 January 1987  | Plea bargain announced. Hofmann pleads guilty to two counts of second-degree murder and two counts of communication fraud involving the Harris Letter and McLellin Papers. Twenty-six other counts dismissed and Hofmann agrees to be interviewed about the murders and documents. He goes to the Utah State Prison. Belief continues among some historians that not all Hofmann-related documents are forgeries. |  |  |

This was the end of Hofmann to the legal system. After so much work went
in to amassing evidence to prove his guilt, after 40 interviews were
conducted and the threat of 5 separate trials were hanging over
Hofmann’s head, he signed a plea bargain, and was sentenced to life
plus 20 in the Utah State Prison in Draper Utah.

After all the damage he’d done, Hofmann did something noble, he agreed
to be interviewed about everything. From mid-February to the end of May
1987, a battery of interviews was conducted with Hofmann so he could
hopefully shed some light on the subject. He was finally beaten. Dorie
Olds, his wife, had filed for divorce. He was on the hook for life in
prison with no hope of parole. He had lost his home, family, friends,
business acquaintances, and his freedom altogether. The last thing he
could do for humanity was give us information about the damage he’d
caused and the appalling amount of work he’d done. After the interviews
were conducted, a 600-page report was released containing nearly every
word spoken between Hofmann and his interviewers.

Ever since this book was released, Hofmann has gone dark. He only takes
visits from his ex-wife and children, and refuses to give any interviews
or sign licensing away to have a movie made about him.

Well, I’m very excited to announce that Mark Hofmann, THE MARK HOFMANN
has agreed to break his vow of silence for an exclusive world first
podcast interview. Believe it or not, the Salt Lake correctional
facility was nice enough to organize transportation and security
measures, and Mark is sitting right here in my living room with me.
Mark, thanks for making the trip out here and doing this.

Interview

M: Uhh, yeah, You’re welcome

B: This is going to be a pretty standard interview; do you mind
answering a few questions about yourself?

M: Yeah, but I don’t want to be away from my cell for too long, so let’s
get to it.

B: Sounds good. Mark, you’re credited with being one of the most
prolific and professional document forgers out there. You’re work spans
from signatures of prominent historical figures, Mormon or otherwise, to
bank notes, to even some kinderhook plates. You forged two copies of the
earliest known document printed in America, that’s the Oath of a
Freeman, and even claimed to have work from Edgar Allen Poe and a
Charles Dickens manuscript. Can I just ask, when did you get started
with the hobby of forging things?

M: Well, when I was 15, I electroplated a rare mint mark on a coin,
making it worth several thousand dollars. I took the coin to a dealer
who sent it to the U.S. Treasury in Washington, D.C., which pronounced
it as authentic. My rationalization was that if the Treasury Department
pronounces it genuine, then it is genuine by my definition. I devised
the plan to manufacture and sell documents to the church while I was on
my mission. I’m an atheist now.

B: Interesting, you got started earlier than I thought.

M: I had been forging for 22 years, that’s all I think about\! Sometime
around 1979, I was talking with A.J. Simmons about a book called “The
Word”. The plot of the book centers around a forgery of the
5<sup>th</sup> gospel of Jesus, the gospel of James. He jokingly said
that when he retires, he’ll forge the ultimate Nauvoo diary then sell it
to BYU. We both laughed at the time, but he didn’t realize I was doing
it already. I’ve been doing this since I was 12 years old.

B: What really got you interested in Mormon history and making these
forgeries?

M: The more I studied about Joseph Smith and his writing, the better I
got.

B: So it was really just a fascination with Joseph Smith and Mormon
history, then you began making forgeries?

M: Whenever I needed money, I thought up something to forge. I would
think, what would Joseph Smith say in this situation? I would just put
myself in his shoes, and say whatever I thought he would say.

B: Tell me about your first real forgery, the second anointing blessing
you supposedly “Found”.

M: That was a crude forgery\! I used some of the words in D\&C 124, and
said what I thought Joseph Smith probably would have said. I knew Joseph
Smith was deeply involved in temple rights at that time, and thought he
would probably use language similar to the language found in D\&C 124.

B: After that you came out with the Anthon Transcript, supposedly
written by Joseph Smith showing the characters that were on the Gold
plates.

M: I wanted mine to look like it came first and that the others were
copied from it. I used the Whitmer version and just added a few
flourishes to make it look different.

B: Tell me a little about the church and the Salamander Letter.

M: I thought it would be worth more money than I got. I also thought the
Church would hide it.

B: Do you see how some people might claim that you were changing Mormon
history by creating this Salamander letter?

M: I won’t go as far to say I wanted to change Mormon history. Let me
take that back. Maybe I did. In effect, I guess the questions I asked
myself in deciding on a forgery, one of the questions was, what could
have been? I had a concept of church history, and I followed that
concept. Originally, initially it was more of the fame involved,
although I thought all along that it would be sold, and the more
publicity I got, the better.

B: Did fame really have that much to do with it, or was it also that you
like to bamboozle people by making them believe a lie, whether it was a
lie you directly told the person, or a lie in the form of a document you
forged?

M: I’m an expert, I’ve done it hundreds of times. It’s hard to be humble
when you’re as great as I am\! I can look a person in the eye and lie. I
can fool anybody. Obviously, if I would have known they would someday be
detected, I wouldn’t have done it.

B: Hmmm, I think that speaks volumes to your initial motivations for
doing this, possible delusions of grandeur and a con-man personality.
You just enjoyed fooling people. Tell me about what landed you in
prison. I want to know about the bombings specifically why Steven
Christensen and Gary Sheets?

M: I first considered killing Thomas Wilding, or Brent Ashworth, then
the second bomb would kill me. Then I finally targeted Christensen. The
bomb at the Sheets home was simply a diversion so that everyone would
believe that the bombings were the result of CFS business problems.

B: I also wanted to ask, why bombs? Why not kill them some other, less
messy way?

M: I was attracted to bombs as a murder weapon because then I wouldn’t
have to be present when the explosives were detonated. I didn’t think I
could pull a gun trigger if I had to face my victims, but I could kill
if I didn’t have to be around when it happened.

B: How incredibly cowardly and heartless of you. Gary Sheets was just
collateral damage then, a diversion?

M: I don’t even remember meeting Sheets, I had to look up his address in
the phone book before I delivered the bomb. It didn’t matter to me if
the Sheets bomb went off or not because its purpose was to establish a
diversion. For this purpose, the death was not necessary. I realize, of
course, that the bomb left at the house could kill or severely injure
someone, but it didn’t really matter to me.

B: Do you see how some might take something like that and paint you as a
sadist or psychopathic in some way? When you have no regard for human
life, maybe some of those horrible things people have said about you are
more accurate than I initially understood. I’m trying to understand the
man Mark Hofmann here, not the murderer, not the bomber, not the forger,
the person. Give me something to work with here, Mark.

M: The night before the bombings, it took me about 2 hours to make the
bombs in my basement. I went and placed the first bomb in front of
Gary’s house around 3 in the morning. When I got home, my daughter
woke up so I went and took care of her until she went back to sleep. A
few hours later I went and dropped off the bomb in the judge building
for Steven. Before I walked into the building to drop off the bomb for
Steve, I took off my gloves and left them in a trash can outside. (Why
did you do that?) To test fate.

B: You may be a murderer, but you still obviously love your family, and
would do anything to help them. Even amidst being an active killer, you
still stayed up at 330 in the morning with your daughter to make sure
she fell asleep. You literally did that in between dropping off two
bombs to take away other people’s lives. From what I understand, telling
your family about the forgeries was the hardest thing you ever had to
do.

M: The day the plea bargain was announced, my father, William, kept
saying Mark is an innocent boy, it was really hard on my family. When
Mac Christensen, Steven’s dad saw my father in the courtroom, he said to
my father that his family’s love is with the Hofmann family. My dad
cried.

B: Walk me through the next day. The bombs had gone off in the judge
building and at the Sheets residency, brutally murdering two very good
people, tell me about the bomb going off in your car.

M: The explosion in the sports car was a suicide attempt. The next day I
went to Logan to buy parts for the third bomb. I assembled it in Logan
Canyon, making it substantially larger than the others because I wanted
a quick and clean death.

B: People might say that you were part of a conspiracy, and that you
were bombed by somebody else and you only went to jail to take the fall.
I don’t believe any of these claims, because I think you were plenty
capable of orchestrating all of this by yourself, but tell me--- cut off

M: I acted alone in everything I did.

B: Okay, I suppose that answers that question. People paint you as a
heartless sadistic atheist with no sense of morality. Even your mission
diaries show you had problems with the church and belief in god, what
would you say to people that claim you did this and have no morals
because you’re an atheist?

M: I never cheated anybody if they thought what they were buying was
authentic. As long as the buyer believed it to be true, then it was
authentic. That’s how I treat belief in the church, if you believe in
it, it’s true for you and it doesn’t seem to matter what others say.

B: Once again, I think that just paints you as a nihilistic sadist with
no remorse for your actions. Don’t you see how creating forgeries is a
problem and destroys the trusted historical record? Don’t you see the
damage you did with every fraudulent document you sold or traded away?
You made people believe in things that aren’t true. We can condemn the
truth claims of the LDS church by sticking to the facts, by reporting
what actually happened; but you would rather manufacture your own
history with these documents you forged. You cheated EVERYBODY\! You did
untold damage to the trustworthiness of the historical record\! How can
you think you have any moral high ground here?\!

M: I want to clarify all of this, how all of this fraud and stuff took
place. My view is, when I forged a document and sold it, I was not
cheating that person that I was selling it to because the document would
never be detected as being a fraud. I didn’t feel like I was cheating
people because I always intended to give them what they wanted, their
money’s worth.

B: That’s probably the most horrible thing you’ve said this far. Belief
in something doesn’t make it true\! People have been believing in God
for millennia and none of their beliefs have made god true\! You
manufactured a false reality and sold it as fact\! You took existing
evidence around you and constructed a narrative that you were
comfortable with and then sold that narrative to people for obscene
amounts of money. You created a lifestyle built on lies\! You are no
better than any pastor, holy man, shamen, faith healer, or prophet\! On
top of that, you killed two people right before you nearly killed
yourself. I’ve been reading up on you for a while, and at some level, I
admire your work. You forced the church to confront things in its
history that the leadership wanted to keep locked away forever. You
began conversations about Joseph Smith in households that had never come
to question the occult rituals the young man practiced. You did so much
to help expose the lengths the church would go to in order to conceal
the skeletons in their closet. You forced them to open up their vault
and more importantly their pocket books and dared them to do exactly
what you expected them to do. You have done such good work to help the
field of Mormon history. But… the cost of your work. The deaths. The
ruined families. The 7 parentless children your actions caused. Your own
family and friends that will never see you or talk to you again. The
havoc you wreaked on the trust of Mormon scholars and historians for
decades to come. The cost was simply too much. I can’t think of any
other way you could have had better results, but the cost of the results
and the devastation left in the wake of your actions was just not worth
it. I don’t have anything else to add. If there is one last thing you
could share with the listeners that would shed some light on who the
real Mark Hofmann is, what would it be?

M: When I was a young child, I was given a metal detector. I took some
friends out into the field to look for money and found a jar of coins.
They were amazed. Little did they know that I had gone into the field
earlier and buried the coins so we could find them.

B: Mark, I have a lot to say about that, but I’m afraid our time has
come to a close. Thank you for breaking your vow of silence and
travelling up to Seattle to talk with me today. I wish you would sign
the rights over so we could make a movie about you, people would love
it. Good bye, Mark.

M: Good bye.

An enlightening interview to say the least. And what a surprise to have
the *actual* Mark Hofmann in my living room to interview, breaking a
nearly 30-year vow of silence, am I right?

George Throckmorton put 120 hours into studying the Salamander Letter
before he found the cracked ink that was the giveaway. He, along with a
few others in document forensics, spent thousands of man-hours poring
over documents Hofmann bought or sold. Out of 443 document they
examined, they found that 268 (60%) were authentic, 107 (24%) were
definite forgeries, and 68 (15%) were undetermined. Of those 443
documents, 48 had been bought or sold to the church, the rest were among
multiple private collectors. That’s what made Hofmann so hard to nail
down.

What’s even crazier is they were able to determine when he had changed a
document, easier than they were able to identify a document he had
written from start to finish. One of his last documents was a land deed
between Solomon Spalding and Sidney Rigdon from 1822. Well, originally,
it was a real document signed with the name Asa Spalding, dated in 1792,
before Rigdon was born. Hofmann changed the date to read 1822, wrote in
Rigdon’s signature, and changed the Asa Spalding to Solomon, with 1822
being a date after Spalding’s death in 1816. It was much easier to
identify this legitimate old document that had changes done to it as a
forgery, than it was to identify the Salamander letter as a forgery
which had been invented from top to bottom by Hofmann.

His forgeries still surface today and pass muster. Recently a penny that
was made by Hofmann sold for $48,000 at a Beverly Hills auction as a
legitimate coin. We have no way of telling how much damage Hofmann
really inflicted upon the realm of honest historical study. And I guess
that’s the most frustrating part, isn’t it? If he was a terrible forger,
he would have been caught early on, and his work wouldn’t have infected
the field of study, but unfortunately for us all, he was a master, an
artist, a con-man, and an incredible reader of people.

What’s more than that, he was completely obsessive about his work. From
every description I’ve found of him, he was completely nondescript,
until you questioned his work. This is a quote from Brent Ashworth, the
man who was swindled out of nearly a quarter of a million dollars’ worth
of forgeries by Hofmann.

“When I called him a liar or questioned one of the documents, he'd lose
his temper. Nothing else seemed to make him mad.”

From what I’ve read, it seems like a lot of Hofmann’s ego was wrapped up
in his ability to deceive people. From our interview to hearing Ashworth
talk about questioning Hofmann’s documents infuriated him, it just seems
like Hofmann’s entire existence was dependent upon other people’s
amazement at something he did or made.

I think I made this point last episode, but it needs to be reiterated.
Hoffman arguably did a good thing. That’s a horrible thing to say when
it includes killing two people in disgusting, painful ways, but he
showed the world that we can sniff out fakes and forgeries when it comes
to the historical record. History isn’t so much of a science, but the
way we do science on history is by determining probabilities. And in the
long run, that’s all science really is, determining probabilities. Was
it probable that one man came up with all of these remarkable documents
without something fishy going on? But even before that question was
asked, was it probable that the Salamander Letter was worded in a way we
would expect something Martin Harris wrote down to be worded? Not really
when we compare the letter to Harris’ other works in a scientific
manner. Was it probable that Mark Hofmann found two copies of the Oath
of a Freeman, the most elusive and rare document in all American
history? Not very, so the Library of Congress didn’t pay the $1.5 mn for
it. And I know the case can be made that the Salamander letter, or the
Joseph Smith III blessing, or even the Anthon Transcript fooled so many
people that were scientifically examining them, and that’s completely
true, but not for very long. We’re talking about a maximum of 2 years
the Salamander was in existence that it was able to fool nearly
everybody, but that’s 2 years that it swayed the minds of some people in
a field of study that’s been active for over a century, studied by
thousands of people. The Salamander Letter didn’t make an actual dent in
the field of Mormon historical studies, it was a tiny blip on the
historical radar until it was proven a forgery using scientific
measures.

The point is, we used the existing body of trustworthy scholarship and
historical studies to identify a forgery. Doesn’t that speak to the
factual accuracy of this field more than anything?

A few episodes back I made the point that if everything I’ve studied to
produce this podcast was all anti-Mormon lies, then it represents the
largest conspiracy ever orchestrated. A shadow society of people would
have to exist, unbeknownst to everybody else in the field, that exists
for the sole purpose of manufacturing information and putting it out
there as legitimate Mormon facts. We’re talking a conspiracy the likes
of which the world has never known, in order to completely wash the
truth out of books and the internet for 180 years and replace it with
their own anti-Mormon narrative. It sounds ridiculous, right?

That’s because Hoffman is a perfect example of what happens when
somebody actually conspires to make anti-Mormon forgeries and lies. When
somebody like Hofmann starts injecting their own lies into the field of
study, educated people in the field begin to stand up pretty quickly and
say, “Something doesn’t look right with this situation, we need to dive
into this to find the truth.” It only took 4 years of Hofmann’s really
active meddling with the record for people like the Tanner’s and others
to stand up and say, “we have a problem, maybe things aren’t quite what
they seem”. And now that we caught him, and we understand the scope of
his forgeries, we can effectively cleanse the record of damage done. We
wouldn’t be able to do that if not for the lifetimes of study that have
been dedicated to building up this body of knowledge.

Seven books have been written about Mark Hofmann. 7 entire books have
been dedicated to telling this man’s story. I only really referenced 2
of them, Tracking the White Salamander and the Mormon Murders, but a
huge body of scholarship has been dedicated to nothing more than
exposing Hofmann’s life and forgeries.

Even though so much work has gone into trying to understand this anomaly
of a human being, I still can’t help but feel like we’ve been cheated.
I’m not referring to Hofmann’s forgeries, but rather to Hofmann
himself. I’ve been doing a lot of reading on him and watching plenty of
presentations about who Hofmann was, and I hate to say it, but with most
of what I’ve learned this far, it all seems too simplistic. I feel like
Hofmann was cheated out of a fair trial, but the plea bargain got him
out of the death penalty, so that’s an overall good, but it seems like
he was painted as nothing short of a monster.

If you read a lot of the news articles I’ve been reading on this guy,
you’ll see what I’m talking about. They sold the story of a heartless
villain that set out on a mission to smear the church’s record and
spread cancerous lies to anybody he could get his ravenous clutches on.
He would fly overhead searching for a helpless little rich document
collector that was gullible enough to buy into the Hofmann version of
Mormon history, and he would swoop down at the breakneck speed of mach
Hofmann and snap their pathetic spines with his own little wit and
charm, bending their credulity and deep pocketbooks to his will, and
creating a following of trusting zombies that wholesale bought
everything he manufactured.

He’s the greatest adversary, a humanization of the evil forces that
strive to collapse the church upon itself, and break the good will of
the humble followers of the one true religion. He’s the dark figure in
the night that hides in the deepest recesses of a believer’s mind,
encouraging doubts and spawning unanswerable questions that will only
drive members to leave and testimonies to wither. The beckoning call of
his symphony of lies is far too appealing to simply ignore. Once a
person begins to think like Hofmann and question the church, they are
better off dead, than to think ill of the church’s past.

So many of the newspaper articles I read sound just as fearmongering and
apocalyptic as everything I just said. But, they captured the public
opinion of Hofmann. Most of the people that were reading the Deseret
News already had such derogatory opinions of Hofmann and those articles
were extremely effective at furthering that simplistic caricature.

But we simply can’t ignore the good that Hofmann did. I feel like last
episode shed a much broader light upon the real Hofmann. Where so many
of the articles I read lasered in on one aspect of Hofmann’s work and
personality, the evil aspect, I feel like walking in the room and
turning the light on to really see the whole picture. Hofmann was so
much more than the anti-Mormon boogey-man who heinously murdered two
people.

He was a loving father. He was an avid student of the same exact people
that I’m studying from right now, whether it be the Tanners, Grant
Palmer, H. Michael Marquardt, or any other Mormon historian, Hofmann
loved to learn about history. He loved it so much that he brought it to
life by making documents that fit into the history he was learning. And
this is where I feel the most cheated. I want to know who the real Mark
Hofmann is.

I can’t help but see some serious parallels here. Hofmann loved to
swindle people by making them believe that he had some kind of magic
knowledge of where to find old Mormon documents. He came onto the scene
by claiming he had access to old things that nobody else had access to,
and could dig around and find historical documents that nobody else
could. He loved it when people marveled at his work. He loved to make
that interpersonal connection of fulfilling somebody’s need. Many people
quoted him with asking people what they were looking for, and he would
come back weeks or months later and fulfill that need…. For the right
price.

As time progressed and he gathered more people that were buying into
what he was selling and believing anything he told them, he began to
live quite lavishly. He ate extremely good meals, drove a brand new
sports car, lived in nice homes, was attempting to buy a house that
would be worth well over a million dollars today. He accrued more than
$1.3 mn in personal debt with the business deals he was making.
Eventually, he couldn’t handle the pressure, and everything came
collapsing in on Hofmann. People knew about his fraud and they were
going to expose him, so he decided on the apocalyptic answer of killing
2 people and nearly killing himself. For reasons that are unclear to
everybody, when Hofmann had no options left, he went with the nuclear
option, causing destruction, death and mayhem at the expense of
everybody around him.

And what about that story when he was young. Somehow, Hofmann got ahold
of a metal detector and told his friends he knew where he could find
buried treasure. They go out poking around in the field, and lo and
behold, right where Hofmann had buried the jar of coins before, they
found the exact treasure they were looking for. Are you serious?\!

I’m going to read from a court document that came to us in 1873. In the
realm of historical terms, this is a very reliable document that was
reprinted three separate times when it surfaced, each reprinting being
copied from the original document. There’s an entire pedigree attached
to this document, suffice it to say, we can rely on the information as
being fairly historically accurate. The pages recounting this court
proceeding were torn from the docket book of Justice Albert Neely, who
was the presiding judge over Joseph Smith’s 1826 trial. Check the show
notes for a link to UTLM’s entire story behind this document. Josiah
Stowell, Joseph Smith’s good friend and fellow treasure hunter
testified:

“Josiah Stowel sworn: says that prisoner had been at his house something
like five months; had been employed by him to work on farm part of time;
that he pretended to have skill of telling where hidden treasures in the
earth were by means of looking through a certain stone; that prisoner
had looked for him sometimes; once to tell him about money buried in
Bend Mountain in Pennsylvania, once for gold on Monument Hill, and once
for a salt spring; and that he positively knew that the prisoner could
tell, and did 'possess the art of seeing those valuable treasures
through the medium of said stone; …. that prisoner had told by means of
this stone where a Mr. Bacon had buried money; that he and prisoner had
been in search of it; that prisoner had said it was in a certain root of
a stump five feet from surface of the earth, and with it would be found
a tail feather; that said Stowel and prisoner thereupon commenced
digging, found a tail feather, but money was gone; that he supposed the
money moved down…. That he had been in company with prisoner digging for
gold, and had the most implicit faith in prisoner's skill.”

Let’s see how long this analogy holds. Joseph Smith was a very curious
and intelligent young man. He began reading books about nearly anything
he could get his hands on. Whether they were religious pamphlets
circulating during the second great awakening, or it was his Dad’s
bible, or whatever could be picked up from the bargain bin at the E.B.
Grandin print store, or brought home with him from the couple years of
school he attended. Joseph practiced treasure digging, spending hours
looking into a rock in his hat, telling people around him what special
knowledge he had they nobody else could have. Smith was the foremost
authority on seeing things, mostly buried things, but occasionally other
things as well. Joseph enjoyed the feeling he got when he would tell
somebody something, and they would completely believe him. He would tell
them he knew where to find some lost treasure they were looking for, or
possibly a horse the person had recently lost. Joseph would lie to the
people around him, and make business deals he couldn’t keep. By the time
1837 had rolled around, Joseph Smith had accrued $1.3 mn of today’s
dollars in debt with his bad business practices and poor management of
money. Some people around him knew he was a fraud, but Joseph still kept
persisting and digging himself deeper.

By 1844, Joseph had so many enemies, and so much debt from multiple
sources. Worse than that, a guy named William Law was about to publish a
newspaper that would expose Joseph’s polygamy and fraud to the world.
People were about to find out how much of a con-man Joseph was, so he
chose the apocalyptic answer and blew up the printing press that
published the paper. Over the days following Joseph’s rash action of
tyranny and suppression of information, he went with the nuclear option
and turned himself in, thinking it was the end for him. Before Joseph
died in the Carthage shootout, he killed two people, fell out of a
window, and was unwillingly shot multiple times at point blank range,
never standing on trial for his actions.

While the stories aren’t mirrored images, there are some prominent
similarities we can’t ignore. I suppose that’s what this whole trilogy
of episodes has been centered around, and probably why I can’t seem to
get enough of Hofmann. I’ve said many times that I absolutely love
Joseph Smith for reasons I can’t fully comprehend, I just love a
compelling individual, and Joseph was definitely that, among other
things. And I guess the reason’s I’ve been researching Joseph Smith so
much are the same reasons why I spent so much time on Mark Hofmann.

I started reading about Joseph Smith because I was tired of the
cardboard cutout that I had known my whole life. Joseph Smith was the
prophet, holy, pious, and nearly infallible all his holy days. The
ground he walked on practically glowed with the reverence that Joseph
radiated from his visage. That version of Joseph Smith bored me, and is
about as compelling as a stone rolling down a hill.

I only knew Joseph with these simple words, prophet, seer, revelator and
missed out on the dynamic part of Joseph that makes him a compelling
personality.

Well, I guess that’s where the analogy between Joseph and Mark is
strongest. I only knew Mark Hofmann by the words murderer, forger,
bomber, killer, adversary, liar, and I missed out on the dynamic part of
Hofmann that makes him a real person with a compelling story. I don’t
think there’s really any way to comprehend Hofmann, he’s just too
complicated. There are so many moving pieces that make up his
personality and trying to describe him with simple words just isn’t
enough. That’s the parallel between Joseph and Mark that I find so holds
me in rapture, and has effectively devoured every waking moment of the
past 3 weeks. One could spend a lifetime researching either of these men
and never truly understand who they are.

Among their many parallels, that are striking to say the least, I find
one major difference. Joseph Smith was exposed and caught in a day when
printing materials were the cheapest they had been in history up to that
point. Anybody could go to the local print shop and pay them to print
off a pamphlet that said whatever the person wanted. Information was
travelling at the speed of a horse everywhere throughout settled
America, and most people knew about that crazy cult of Mormonites.
Joseph went with the nuclear option of blowing up the printing press
only once he realized he would be exposed to the world. Bible scholars,
preachers, historians, and other intellectuals were suspecting Joseph as
a con-man and he didn’t want to be exposed.

Similarly, when Hofmann was about to be exposed, he went with his
nuclear option. But before deciding to kill two people, scholars,
bishops, historians, forensics experts, and other people in relevant
fields were beginning to suspect that Hofmann was a con-man and he
didn’t want to be exposed. These points may sound exactly the same,
but the difference I find is the availability of knowledge in 1836 as
opposed to 1986. If not for the thousands of hours dedicated to studying
Hofmann’s work, we may never have found out he was a con-man, especially
if he would have been slightly more cautious about his business
practices. It took an age of lightning fast communication and wide
availability of books to historians and scholars to even begin to
question Hofmann’s work, and once those questions were asked, it was
only a matter of time before he was caught.

I suppose that’s the greatest part of the information age we’re
experiencing right now. Con-men have to work much harder than Joseph did
in his time to not be discovered, and in the end, they usually slip up
and get caught anyway. I would contend, however, that had Hofmann lived
in the 1830’s, we might be singing praise to *that* man who communes
with Jehovah. He may have started up his own religion with his ability
to “find” original gospel manuscripts or something. He may have “found”
an artifact that was once Jesus’ and start a cult that worships Hofmann
in addition to Jesus, instead of Joseph Smith in addition to Jesus.

But, he couldn’t do it in the 1980’s and he sure couldn’t do it today.
Hofmann operated at the very edge of when the internet was starting,
imagine the level of communication between people that were being
defrauded by him today. If another Hofmann cropped up today, how quickly
do you think he would be caught with scholars and historians in constant
contact with each other? Arguably, the whole reason Hofmann chose to
kill Christensen was because he was about to meet with Kenneth Rendell,
a document examiner, and this meeting would expose Hofmann to both of
them as a fraud. Imagine how fast Hofmann would have been caught if
those men were taking photos of the papyri on their phones and emailing
them back and forth to each other as would be the case today.

And I suppose that might be the overall point to all of this… The only
way to catch a con-man is with more information and wider education.
Con-men come in all shapes, sizes, ethnicities, and places. They might
be in the form of a guy selling you a knife set, but the real deal is in
selling the knives for yourself. A con-man might be buying cheap watch
parts from China and manufacturing Rolexes to sell on the street. He
might say, I found this buried treasure we’ve been looking for, treasure
that may have been buried in the ground, or buried in a box of old
documents. And most vindictively, a con-man might come up to you and
say, I know the one and only way to get to heaven, do you want to join
my church?

The only way to catch these people and identify them as con-people is to
spread information by educating people. Often times, the problem with
con-people is they’re widely liked. People really liked Hofmann and
couldn’t picture him as a fraud. People love Joseph, arguably moreso now
than when he was alive, and they can’t picture him as a fraud.

This is a quote from Hugh Nibley, a Mormon apologist and author, about
Joseph Smith’s 1826 court trial.

“…if this court record is authentic it is the most damning evidence in
existence against Joseph Smith… \[it would be\] the most devastating
blow to Smith ever delivered.”

This is from Francis Kirkham, another Mormon apologist.

“If a court record could be identified, and it contained a confession by
Joseph Smith which revealed him to be a poor, ignorant, deluded, and
superstitious person—unable himself to write a book of any consequence,
and whose church could not endure because it attracted only similar
persons of low mentality—if such a court record confession could be
identified and proved, then it follows that his believers must deny his
claimed divine guidance which led them to follow him… How could he be a
prophet of God, the leader of the Restored Church to these tens of
thousands, if he had been the superstitious fraud which the pages from a
book declared he confessed to be?”

Whether it’s Nibley, Kirkham, or Brent Ashworth, people don’t like it
when their hero is shown in true color as a fraud. Both of those quotes
were written before Walters found Neely’s bill to substantiate the
trial. After Walters found the bill, these apologists went eerily
silent… You wonder why…

So how do we bring this all together? We’re cracking the 9nth hour of
podcast about Hofmann here; we need to take away a proper lesson from
this. I guess the final thing I would say is, skepticize everything. If
you’re skeptical about any given claim that a person makes, that
instantly makes you less likely to be conned than the person standing
next to you. It would be nice if we could all just get along, and agree
to not steal from each other, or defraud one another, but that’s not the
world we live in, and human nature simply won’t allow it. The only thing
we can do is take prophylactic measures to guard ourselves and our loved
ones against people like Hofmann and Smith. If you see a loved one that
starts to buy into something that sounds too good to be true, it’s your
duty to skepticize the situation and ask that person, how much do you
really know about this thing you’re about to buy, or be baptized in to.
How probable is it that Hofmann would actually find the EXACT thing you
were looking for? How probable is it that these Mormons are ACTUALLY the
one true church? How much do you really know about the document dealer
Mark Hofmann? How much do you really know about the real Joseph Smith,
not the prophet they tell you about?

And it has to be said, it sounds like I’m shining a negative light on
Hofmann right now, and that’s not the case at all. Like I said before, I
love Joseph Smith, and I’ve come to love the real Joseph the more I
learn about him. I only seek to understand the man. Well, the parallels
don’t stop here, and I have to say that I love Mark Hofmann. The more I
learn about the man, the more I’m fascinated by the real Hofmann behind
all the headlines. It may sound weird to hear that I love a man who is a
murderer, but Joseph Smith murdered at least two people and millions of
people claim to love and worship him as the prophet, so maybe I’m not
the weirdest one here. I just sincerely believe that Hofmann has been
characterized as being nothing more than a monster and I believe that
does a disservice to him and to anybody that seeks to learn about him.

So if by some stroke of luck this podcast makes it to the ears of Mark
Hofmann, I briefly want to speak directly to him.

Mark, please help us understand you. During the height of your days, you
made amazing advancements into uncovering what goes on behind the closed
doors of the church leadership. You showed to an entire generation that
the church would be willing to buy challenging historical documents to
suppress them. You laid bare how ill-equipped the church is to deal with
its convoluted past and foundation by a mad-man. No single person has
done a greater service to the world of Mormon scholarship as you. You
must be commended for your effort and the amount of thought you poured
into orchestrating such a massive PR nightmare for the church.

Even the amount of money you stole can be ignored when we take it on
balance with the level you exposed the church. I mean, if we’re talking
sheer numbers here, the church makes off with $7 bn a year by conning
people, you only managed $1.3 mn in 6 years’ time, I think we can forget
about who really deserves to be in jail when we look at the numbers
alone.

But Mark, you also made a string of very rash decisions, and I don’t
think it’s fair to label you as a simple murderer for a week of lapsed
judgement. You are obviously much more complicated than any one word
names can describe, and apparently much more complicated than 9 hours of
podcasting can represent.

I know that you’ve refused visits from anybody other than family members
and your attorney, and I can’t possibly begin to comprehend the
reasoning behind this decision; but I hope you will begin to reconsider
opening up that line of thought once again. You may think that your
story has come to an end with a lifetime prison sentence, but there is
so much legacy attached to the name Mark Hofmann, and people want to
know your story for real. People want to learn about the real Mark, not
the Hofmann forger-bomber from back in the 80’s.

Please Mark, meet with some people that would be able to tell your real
story. Please give an interview. This vow of silence has gone for 30
years, and it would be a tragedy to lose this story to your death that
will likely happen within the next 30 years. You’re the only person that
can properly tell your story. In 80 pages of notes, I haven’t actually
gotten any closer to who the real Hofmann is, that’s something that can
only be attained through speaking with you directly, Mark. We can sit
here in our internet community and try to envision who you really are,
but until you actually appear on record and a real documentary can be
made about you, we’re all left in the dark, sifting through newspaper
clippings of your legacy and trying to piece the real Hofmann together.

What you did cannot be changed. The name of Mark Hofmann will never be
unshackled from the label of murderer, but what you can do is offer
everybody else the chance to understand you and your mission. You must
have had an agenda to take down the church, or at very least make it
look foolish, but that mission gets lost in the noise of people labeling
you as an extortionist and murderer. I think you accomplished what you
initially set out to do, but people don’t look at your exposing the
church and say that’s the end of the story, they always end the story
with bombs going off and you nearly killing yourself.

There’s so much information, that only you have, that would be so useful
to the world. Did you manufacture the Oliver Cowdery history and leak to
the press that it exists? What actually happened with the McLellin
collection, and why was it found in the church archives while you were
going to trial? What was your actual plan with the McLellin collection?
How much money did the church really give you and for how many
documents? We know about the Salamander Letter and the Joseph Smith III
blessing, but what else did you sell to the church that didn’t get any
press that was just as challenging to their history? What else is the
church hiding? Did the church really have nothing to do with your plea
bargain, or was there motivation for them to not go to court over this
whole ordeal and they forced the plea deal?

These are all questions that I want to ask you directly, Mark. And the
best part is, you could answer them however you want, and it’s up to the
church and the Mormon historical community to deal with your answers,
truthful or not. There could be a new resurgence of Hofmann altering
Mormon history, because anything you said in an interview would have to
be answered by the church. If you gave us proof that the Oliver Cowdery
history existed, even if it was your work, the church would stumble all
over themselves with first denying it, then accepting it and putting out
a PR friendly press release that the history really exists. There could
be a whole new era of Hofmann forgeries coming out of the church vaults,
making the church and its leadership look foolish all over again in the
internet age.

Mark, if your initial mission was to show the world that the church will
go to extreme lengths to hide their history, you’ve already won. And now
I’m offering a chance to do it all over again. Please reconsider doing
an interview with somebody, and please allow your thoughts to meander to
the possibility of interviewing for a documentary. We can’t lose your
story just because you’re locked in a cage for the rest of your life.
Please give us a legacy we can love, instead of being just that guy that
made the Salamander letter that ended up killing some people. We deserve
the truth, and more importantly, you deserve a proper legacy. Do it for
your family, and most importantly, do it for you. Help us answer that
all important question with which we opened up this episode, Why?...

Until that day comes that Mark Hofmann opens himself up to the world for
a real interview, and that day may never come, I suppose this is the
best we can get. And my only final thought is, thank you Mark. Thank you
for what you did.

<u>Bonus</u>

I’ll give you a second to guess how much was actually Hofmann’s words.
Take a guess….. got it? Well, you’re wrong. All of it…. The correct
answer is EVERY SINGLE LINE.
