---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 82 - CC Polygamy Pt5 Lindsay Park & MLM
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-82-cc-polygamy-pt5-lindsay-park-mlm/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-82-cc-polygamy-pt5-lindsay-park-mlm
libsyn_embed: 6079699

category: History
date: 2017-12-21 11:03:10 PST
---

Ep 82 – CC Polygamy Pt5 Lindsay Park & MLM

On this episode, we invite returning guest, Lindsay Hansen Park of
Sunstone and Year of Polygamy, to discuss some contemporary issues with
modern-day polygamy and some of the prominent sects of Fundamentalist
Mormonism. What some see as practicing religious freedom, others may
consider sexual coercion and grooming from young ages, but the sexual
dynamic of polygamy is only one small aspect of the day-to-day lives of
these Mormons. After that we have another installment of Mormon Leaks
Minute with Ryan McKnight to discuss the Trump posthumous work and the
recent Homosexuality Pamphlet leaks.

Links:

Lindsay Park Year of Polygamy  
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/year-of-polygamy/episode-111-the-united-effort-plan/>  
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/year-of-polygamy/episode-120-flds-and-faithful-part-two/>

Mormon Leaks discussed  
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2017/12/04/mormonleaks-releases-the-posthumous-temple-records-for-the-parents-and-grandparents-of-donald-j-trump/>  
<https://mormonleaks.io/wiki/index.php?title=File:Homosexuality-1981.pdf>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Lindsay Interview questions/topics:

We’ve spent a bit of time breaking down Mormon polygamy. We’ve discussed
various cultures and religions throughout history which have practiced
some form of polygamy or polyamory in part 1. Part 2 we went through
Joseph Smith’s polygamy and discussed a bit about what the women were
experiencing through their own writings, thanks to Todd Compton of
course. Then in Part 3 we hit on Mormon polygamy post 1844 all the way
up to the Brighamite 1890 manifesto and all the politics surrounding
Utah and the federal government with relation to polygamy. Today we’re
going to attempt a discussion about 20<sup>th</sup>-century Mormon
polygamy and try to discuss modern iterations. When it comes to the
topic of polygamy, I’m still a fledgling child when it comes to
knowledge on the subject, so we’re bringing on a returning guest expert
who has been studying polygamy for years now to get her take on the
subject. Please join me in welcoming Lindsay Park back to the show,
thanks for joining us, Lindsay, it’s a pleasure to have you\!

I have a few prepared questions to use as jump-off points for our
discussion today. But, before we get started, I was wondering if there
was anything in particular you’d like to preface the conversation with,
maybe something to put us in the right state of mind or help set the
stage for our discussion today?

I’ll just briefly add to what you said. I’ve spent the whole time
covering polygamy discussing what is, instead of what ought to be. We’ll
try to stick with that sentiment for today’s discussion.

Mormonism is a religion which aggrandizes those who hold the priesthood,
and it’s subsequently moved and led by men who’ve largely been
incredibly misogynistic in their ideology. Most of Mormon history is
written by men about men, and women seem to be an addendum to the cause,
rather than an integral piece to the Mormon puzzle. Lindsay, you’ve made
great efforts in feminizing the field of Mormon studies, or at least
highlighting women’s role in Mormon history. Are there any women
specifically you’d like to discuss who played a major role in Mormon
history?

You’ve done a lot of work with people who practice fundamentalism.
You’ve spent a bit of time in Short Creek and other areas known to be
fundamentalist strongholds, what’s been your overall impression in
associating with these groups of people?

You recently had an incredibly rare opportunity in interviewing members
of the FLDS on episodes 120 & 121 of Year of Polygamy. What did you
personally take away from those interactions?

UEP?

I want to dive into a really tough subject when it comes to polygamy and
the power dynamic created in polygynist communities, and that’s consent
and education. This is where I personally take issue with these groups
because Mormonism has created a culture where the accepted societal norm
is a male centric power dynamic and women are beholden to their husbands
for their own salvation. When a man tells his wife that he needs to take
another wife in order to get to the celestial kingdom, it’s her decision
that decides whether or not they’re getting into heaven, but there’s
this inherent coercive force underlining these interactions. How do we
parse out educated and consensual relationship dynamics with the
religious aspect so deeply intertwined in their decision-making process?

You’ve been bridging the gap between sects of Mormonism for years now,
and I thank you for your ability and drive to do so. A person like
myself, and likely the majority of the listeners, would be seen as a
heretic, apostate, infidel, etc. What can people like us can do to help
these people, especially the disenfranchised women, who find themselves
in these situations?

Now for a large and probably unanswerable question: Do you see any
logical end to the misogynistic practices of Mormon polygamy anytime in
the near future? If so, what does that look like? If not, why and should
we even work towards trying to educate people out of fundamentalism?

A bit of an easier question, beyond the Year of Polygamy podcast and all
the work being done about the history of polygamy in Mormonism, are
there any historians/scholars or people who work with modern-day
fundamentalists we could point the listeners towards should they find
themselves wanting more information on the subject?

Any final thoughts you’d like to leave us with today?

Great, I’ll leave links to everything you listed in the show notes for
easy access. Lindsay, it’s always a pleasure speaking with you, thank
you for all the work you do with Year of Polygamy, Color of Heaven, and
more importantly, for all your work with Sunstone and bringing Mormons
of all stripes together. Thank you for joining us today.
