---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 72 – Nauvoo: Divine Inspeculation'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-72-nauvoo-divine-inspeculation/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-72-nauvoo-divine-inspeculation
category: History
date: 2017-10-13 03:06:00 +0000
---

This week's episode of Naked Mormonism is brought to you by Hello Fresh.
Visit hellofresh.com and enter promo code Naked30 to get \$30 off your
first week of deliveries when you sign up.

Ep 72 -- Nauvoo: Divine Inspeculation

On this episode, we dive right back into the historical timeline with
talk on some detailed land purchase agreements. Jo and the Mormons were
in a bad spot when they began settling Nauvoo and land speculation was
the new counterfeit money to hobble the church along with a falsely
inflated economy. Land speculators never pass on making some money on
destitute people, and Jo does the same when selling land to the Mormons,
but actual specie exchange rarely happened. After that, we bring on
Ethan Dodge, the second half of the Mormon Leaks team, to discuss the
recent leaks leading up to conference weekend as well as a little bit
about himself. To cap it off, I'll speak very briefly about Mythcon 2017
in Milwaukee.

Links:

Susan Easton Black lectures\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YT931JI2LTI>\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dBbhBHvvmEk&t=355s>

Ethan Dodge Reddit AMA\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/7342m8/im_ethan_dodge_aka_privacy_p_pratt_lead_engineer/>

My Mormon Experience Podcast\
<https://player.fm/series/my-mormon-experience>

Leaks Discussed in MLM\
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2017/09/28/mormonleaks-releases-emails-and-attachment-regarding-gospel-topics-essays-and-attendance-statistics/>\
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2017/09/30/mormonleaks-releases-recordings-of-august-2017-kansas-wichita-area-adult-and-youth-sessions/>

Church stats reddit thread\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/72zyhm/mormonleaks_releases_emails_and_attachment/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

I've been out of the office for quite some time so there is a bunch to
get to today in resuming our historical timeline and the housecleaning
afterwards. For the last 2 episodes, we suspended the timeline to have a
couple of special episodes talking with some Mormon historians as well
as the bundles of energy that are Tom and Cecil of the Cognitive
Dissonance podcast, so let's review where we're sitting in the timeline
for some milk before we get into the meat today.

Last historical timeline episode, we were catching up with the quorum of
the Twelve apostles on their mission through Europe. By the way, thanks
to everybody who sent in corrections, specifically Andrew and Alice with
Tems, not Thames, and Glawstersher not Gloucestershire. I always
appreciate a little help when it comes to those old English terms, or
really any other big or weird words I don't have the foresight to google
when preparing the show notes. We read through a number of newspaper
articles tracking the movements of the missionaries, as well as read a
letter they sent back to the brethren in America about some of their
sight-seeing adventures. After catching up with the quorum, we jumped
into a little-known debate between a Mormon missionary and a skeptic
who'd obviously read Eber Howe's Mormonism Unvailed, who brought up some
common criticisms of Mormonism and the Book of Mormon which the Mormon
missionary/apologist couldn't seem to answer. Interestingly enough, the
criticisms our skeptic brought up are the same criticisms skeptics bring
up today when discussing the Book of Mormon, showing that there really
are fundamental issues with the truth claims of Mormonism. After the
historical timeline, we had on Mike who put together an armchair
statistical assessment of Utah vs. Norway to find out which is closest
to getting voiped up to heaven due to perfect righteousness by Mormon
standards.

That'll fill our loins with enough milk to get us by, let's partake of
the meat.

Nauvoo was a hotbed for speculators. The Mormons had a golden
opportunity to turn Nauvoo into a sprawling metropolis with unrivaled
access to the largest shipping river in the United States and realize an
incredible potential to become the next biggest manufacturing center in
the state of Illinois. Add into that the fact that Nauvoo was surrounded
by fertile farmland to sustain the population and a bunch of land
speculators had Nauvoo slated as the next Chicago with the massive
influx of Mormon population, and a lot of people had a realistic
optimism for the future of the city. For comparison, the population of
Chicago on the 1840 census was just under 4.5k, whereas Nauvoo ticked in
at a cool 2.5k. Nauvoo briefly surpassed Chicago in population with the
influx of Mormon refugees climbing that population to around 12-15k by
1845, but by 1850, the census put Nauvoo at only 1,200 inhabitants, less
than 10% of its peak.

Those people who had high expectations of Nauvoo's trajectory weren't
crazy to be optimistic when we look at strictly the population
statistics. Nauvoo and Chicago were duking it out for most populous city
in Illinois during the first half of 1840, and with all the attractive
attributes of the city, it was hard not to see things in a falsely
positive light.

So what happened? Why did Chicago build at a steady rate teeming at over
2.5 mn on the 2010 census, whereas Nauvoo sits at a barely sustainable
1,100 today? How did one city become the central hub and the other fall
away into obscurity as nothing more than a tourist destination for
Mormon history geeks like myself?

There really is no single simple answer to those questions, it's a
multifaceted cascade of economic and social circumstances which caused
Nauvoo's volatile single boom and bust in a single decade's time.

The main reason the Mormons were driven from Missouri and forced to
settled in Illinois and Iowa in the first place was due to their warlike
solutions to Mormon poverty. When the Mormons couldn't afford to buy
enough food to hunker down through the winter of 1838-9 in Missouri,
they solved that problem by looting the gentile's property in the areas
surrounding the Mormon settlements. In the modern era, a group of people
with enough resources to survive usually don't just go commit random
burning and pillaging just for the hell of it, the Mormons needed food
and supplies to survive so they went and took them by force. The
perpetual state of poverty Jo had run the Mormons and the church at
large into wasn't an easy hole to dig themselves out of, and that state
of poverty was a dark cloud overhanging the Mormons every moment during
the struggling first years of the Nauvoo settlement. So, the Mormons
beginning their settlement efforts were already running in the red, and
they constructed their settlements on top of an ever-growing mountain of
debt.

As much effort as they devoted to building up the city's economy and
manufacturing, there are always economic pressures people can't control.
I offer an example I learned from a presentation at the JWHA conference
which really shed light on how impotent the Mormons were in influencing
the tides and forces of the larger economy, regardless of how much
diligence and hope they put into building up Nauvoo as a central trading
district.

At the conference, a man named Mark Goodmansen presented on the land
speculation in and around Nauvoo and included some interesting
information about Francis Scott Key's affiliation with the Mormons and
land speculators as a renowned lawyer. Included in Mr. Goodmansen's
presentation was an interesting tidbit which really informed us on just
how much people aren't in control of economics as much as they wish they
were. He talked a bit about a town just south of Nauvoo called Warsaw,
from which the Warsaw Signal, edited and published by Thomas Sharp, was
distributed. Warsaw was a quaint little town with a booming economy
right on the banks of the Mississippi. Warsaw's economy was great during
the 1840s, and here's why. During the low-river season, shipping boats
were forced to dock in Warsaw and unload their cargo where it was to be
shipped some 30 miles down the river where they would pick the cargo
back up and continue their voyage down the river. During the low-river
season, the Mississippi was too shallow and the boats would be damaged
if they didn't unload. So, during this season, Warsaw was the town where
shippers and seamen would spend a few days sleeping, eating, shopping,
doing all the things that boost a town's economy, which was the
lifeblood of the town, creating all the jobs necessary to support these
shippers and their bad habits. Goodmansen went on to discuss the
construction and completion of a canal which routed boats down river
during low-river season, making it so they didn't need to dock in Warsaw
and unload their cargo and do all the things necessary to keep Warsaw a
booming little shipping town with tons of jobs. This canal completely
starved out Warsaw, Illinois and by the 1890s jobs were very scarce and
the Warsaw economy was only barely self-sustaining as there was no
tourist appeal, no major factories, no major farming operations, or
anything to keep the town going.

The point is, the completion of this canal to circumvent Warsaw was
something unforeseen and out of the control of the inhabitants of the
city, but they suffered irreparable economic decline from it. Once those
jobs to sustain Warsaw as a shipping port were gone, they weren't ever
coming back. The Mormons in Nauvoo were in a similar boat, there were a
number of economic factors out of their control which had profound
impacts. One of the reasons Chicago gathered strength instead of Nauvoo,
when they were so closely competing for business and settlement, was
simply due to its location. Nauvoo was on the very edge of the western
area inhabited by European settlers. Most of the land further west
beyond Nauvoo was still first-nationer land, whereas Chicago was closer
to the rest of the European major hubs, and easily accessible as a
central trading hub on the banks of lake Michigan with quick access to
every other major city located on the banks of any of the great lakes.
That was a factor completely out of control of the Mormons, a problem to
which they had no solution, and likely were ignorant of.

Given Nauvoo's fatal flaws they didn't have control over, the Mormons
had to make it as appealing as possible with the few things they could
control. The only thing they had final say and near total control over
was the land market. The Mormons had enough problem with counterfeit
money crashing their local economy, so land speculation became the new
trade option for bartering and making work happen. When Jo didn't have
money to give somebody for a specific good or service, he would promise
them land he'd purchased on credit in payment for said good or service.
This lead to horrifically volatile land prices because Jo might pay one
guy an acre for a couple bushels of corn and another guy would be paid
an acre for a few weeks' worth of working construction for the church.
There was no overseeing body or committee who were supposed to control
the volatility, nor did anybody with an education or background in
economics serve as advisor to the prophet. Jo was in control of
everything and was trustee-in-trust of all church assets and monetary
affairs. Very early into the Nauvoo years, Jo made an utter and complete
mess of things, keeping terrible records, not recording his debts and
assets with any reliable system, and having no standardized value for
acreage.

Thing is, Jo realized he was creating a mess of things, and at some
point didn't want to be the church's money guy anymore. This is from
Robert Flanders' "Nauvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi," beginning with
page 121:

"On June 18, 1840, the Prophet asked the High Council to relieve him
from his responsibility as chief land agent because the burden was heavy
and he needed more time for other activities. He rehearsed the necessity
for the original purchase of Hancock and Lee County lands, for which
'your Memorialist had to become responsible for the payment of the same,
and had to use considerable exertion in order to commence a settlement.
. . Under the then existing circumstances your memorialist had
necessarily to engage in the temporalities of the Church...' But the
spiritual needs of the church were now pressing. He wanted to pursue his
inspired revision of the Bible and to translate some Egyptian parchments
he considered of import. Furthermore he wished to be free to 'wait upon
the Lord for such revelations as may be suited to the conditions and
circumstances of the Church.

(Now from the History of the Church in Flanders' book)

'And in order that he may be enabled to attend to those things, he prays
your honorable body will relieve him from the anxiety and trouble
necessarily attendant on business transactions, by appointing someone to
take charge of the city plot...'

The High Council considered his request but failed to do more than to
give him another salesman. The Prophet responded with an irritated veto
of the action. The Council, though chastened, remained insistent that
Smith not resign the temporal responsibilities since no one else was
willing or able to assume them. They were in perfect accord with the
spirit and intent of his request. They thought it 'wise' and
'appropriate,' and they would try to give him more help; but, they said,
'as he is held responsible for the payment of the city plot, and knowing
no way to relieve him from the responsibility at present, we would
request of him to act as treasurer for the city plot and to whom those
persons whom we may appoint to make sales of lots and attend to the
business affairs of the Church may be at all times responsible....'"

By mid-1840, Jo knew how much of a tangled web Nauvoo finances were and
was trying to pass his own monetary problems off to the High Council.
They knew just as much as he did that nothing was in order and all debts
assumed by the Church were essentially Jo's own debts in his own name so
they didn't want to get anywhere near the finances. Debt in Nauvoo was
plutonium and anyone who got anywhere near it would find their finances
slowly decaying from its cancerous effects. But the problem was, nobody
wasn't infected. Every single Mormon who settled in Nauvoo did so by
buying land from Jo which he'd purchased from people like White,
Hotchkiss, and Galland, and Jo just passed that debt on to whomever
purchased the land from him. This is how many congregations of people
are built, but it's only done successfully when there are controlling
measures put into place, Jo had no control of the land market even
though he was the chief sole investor.

To describe just how much of a mess Jo was making, allow me to read
another paragraph from Flanders' Nauvoo Kingdom on the Mississippi.
Essentially, Jo was making a ton of business transactions, but often
wasn't worrying about all that bothersome paperwork to make things
official, just a gentleman's handshake agreement and maybe a signed bill
of sale with the one true prophet was enough to allay most people's
concerns.

"The Prophet continued to purchase land. In October, 1840, he bought
eighty acres of farmland twelve miles south of the city for \$2,000; in
March, 1842, he offered \$2,000 for twenty acres in Nauvoo yet unowned
by the Church. In March, 1841, he purchased from his secretary, Robert
Thompson, fifty lots in Nauvoo for \$10,000. The following July,
Thompson sold Emma Smith 123 acres in the south edge of Nauvoo for
\$4,000. Mrs. Smith might have been proxy or agent for her husband in
this transaction. To what extent Smith was acting as a private
entrepreneur in these purchases it is impossible to know. At least at
first he considered his fortunes intimately connected with those of the
Church; the device of Trustee was only a necessary legal convention. The
county records are not a reliable guide to the extent of his dealings;
many transactions were not recorded there until after his death, and
many were never recorded there at all."

Jo always had a hard time keeping church and secular matters separated,
some would argue he actively intermingled the two even when doing so was
not his best option. When it came to land speculation, the status of
Prophet was about the only thing that lent any credit to Jo, otherwise
he was just a dude who never paid his debts. If not for his status as
prophet, the people making deals with him likely would have been
slightly more skeptical and may not have extended tens of thousands of
dollars of credit to him.

Because Jo had no sense for economics and wasn't a good deal maker, his
agreements to purchase land at exorbitant prices drove land prices to
incredible highs. Think of it in terms of stock with some simple math.
If a company exists with 500 shares owned by 100 people and one person
decides they want to buy up all the shares, the price of the stock is
going to skyrocket and anybody else trying to buy the stock will be
priced out. Nauvoo land was the physical stock owned by the church, and
Jo was buying up all the land he could in areas around Nauvoo which
created this massive inflation bubble. The White and Galland purchases
were a few of the largest contracts Jo signed in acquiring land for the
Saints, but the Hotchkiss and Gillet purchase really captured this
problem of drastic inflation which made buying land for the average
Mormon completely impossible to be done with regular specie, so credit
was extended to them by Jo who was operating on nothing but credit.

From pg 42 of Flanders' Nauvoo book:

"The 'Hotchkiss Purchase' was for Smith and the Church the greatest
business venture since the Kirtland Bank. Hotchkiss apparently knew a
city when he saw one coming upon his property; accordingly the price was
high, considering the approaching deflation and monetary stringency. The
purchase was in the form of a land contract, the Church to have
possession of the property but not the deeds until the debt was paid.
Apparently no money was paid down, and the terms were entailed in a
series of notes. Two notes of \$25,000, one maturing in ten and one in
twenty years, seem to have been the principle. There were forty
additional notes of \$1,500 each (totaling \$60,000) two of which were
due every twelve months for twenty years. These were apparently the
interest: eight percent a year simple interest on \$50,000. There were
two additional notes of \$1,250, one due in five years and the other in
ten. So the Church was to pay the Hotchkiss partners \$3,000 each year
for twenty years, plus \$1,250 the fifth year, \$26,250 the tenth year,
and \$25,000 the twentieth year. Finally an additional \$2,000 was to be
paid Hugh White, who owned a small interest in the property. The total
amount was \$114,500 (\$3.03mn 2016). Smith subsequently claimed that
Hotchkiss had agreed verbally that no interest was to be charged, but
the contracts do not suggest any such agreement. The obligations of the
Hotchkiss Purchase forced Smith and the Church into the real-estate
business on a large scale and determined that city lots in Nauvoo would
not be inexpensive."

For some added context, at this time the average price for land was
between \$2.50-13 per acre nationwide with a 1957 study on census.gov
putting the average price of improved land at \$11/acre. The price
varied widely depending on geography and a few other factors including
how improved the land was and how close it was to major trading hubs,
but Commerce was uninhabited swampland when the Mormons purchased it and
nearly 150 miles from the next biggest trading hub, probably fetching a
fair market value on the low end of that scale, maybe between \$5-7 per
acre. If we calculate it out, with the Hotchkiss purchase, the divinely
inspired Prophet Joseph Smith agreed to pay around \$229 per acre. He
paid around 32 times the expected market value at most generous
estimates. Even if we're as generous as possible by comparing Nauvoo
land prices to the most desirable land in the country like improved land
in New York city or something, Jo still paid over 20 times the fair
market value of improved land for the Hotchkiss purchase.

The worst part about all of this was Jo was only a middleman with his
name on the contracts. The real suffering from this criminal level of
land speculation was shouldered by the Mormons themselves who were
buying the land from Jo at these prices. Jo couldn't sell the land to
the Mormon refugees at the nationwide market value because he'd be
shouldering huge losses and wouldn't be able to fulfill the signed
contracts. But none of the Mormons could afford these prices, it just
couldn't be done. That's where Jo used land to buy labor and goods from
the settling Mormons. You gave the prophet some food or livestock or you
helped him build a few houses, you got a small plot of land, and Jo went
even further into debt as he was giving these land assets away with no
cash in hand exchanged. This business method of chaos and pandemonium
was short-sighted at best and vindictive at worst.

The desperate situation of the Mormons drew in the worst people with
intentions of making money regardless of the consequences. The Mormons
were not only vulnerable prey to these kinds of people, they were led by
one of them. I guess there's nothing like a little bit of human
suffering to bring out the worst in people. But really, what was the
alternative? White, Galland, Hotchkiss, Gillet, all of these land
speculators did reprehensible things capitalizing on the Mormons'
desperation and suffering, and Jo was just as deplorable for doing the
same, but at least Jo's actions are excusable because he was just as
desperate as each and every Mormon without a home. Jo made rash
decisions without any foresight in an effort to save the Mormon
population, but that was desperation, not altruism, which is perfectly
captured when we see Jo doing stuff like this from 120 of Flanders'
Kingdom on the Mississippi:

"Smith's most extensive holdings were in the neighborhood of his own
residence, near the river bank at the corner of Main and Water Streets
on the south side of the flat. His general merchandise store, which also
housed his office, was nearby, as well as the Nauvoo House hotel, the
Times and Seasons office, the houses of several Apostles, and, in 1843,
his Nauvoo Mansion hotel. Lots in the area were in demand, and it was
the earliest and most completely developed part of the lower town. 'On
the south,' said an observer late in 1841, 'the lots are mostly taken,
and a great share of the improvements seem to be bestowed on this part
of the city.'"

Jo improved the area around his own house on Water street very first. If
he was indeed the altruistic prophet for the people he claimed to be, he
would be living in a shack until every other Mormon had a brick home,
but he did the exact opposite. He knew what was going on too. He knew he
was speculating on land values and the people knew it just as much as
him. These business deals may have been sold as divine providence, but
anybody with a brain in their skull knew Jo was speculating on land and
these land speculators from which he was purchasing the land were
largely setting Nauvoo's economic trajectory on a disaster path.

From later in Flanders' book:

"There were strong feelings in the Church against speculators and
speculation, a common American antagonism heightened in the case of the
Mormons because so many had been hurt by the bursting of the Kirtland
bubble. Yet it is impossible to conceive of the Nauvoo land business as
being free of speculation. Nauvoo was by definition a speculation, if
not for private, then for community gain. Professional speculators would
have slipped past armed patrols to reach Nauvoo. Attracted by its
spectacular growth, many of these professional speculators joined the
Church, and some were accorded the land as profiting the common good:
"Suppose I sell some land for ten dollars an acre, and I gave three,
four, or five dollars per acre; then some persons may cry out 'you are
speculating;' Yes, I will tell them: I buy other lands and give them to
the widow and the fatherless. If the speculators run against me, they
run against the buckles of Jehovah.'"

That last quoted bit was from Jo himself included in volume 5 of the
History of the Church. We can harbor no illusions that the Mormons
didn't know how this land came into their possession. Flanders makes a
good case for Nauvoo itself being pure speculation, coupled with the
fact that the town didn't have any appeal other than its own rapid
population growth, Nauvoo was an inflating bubble set to implode upon
the Mormons in a much more spectacular and cataclysmic fashion than
anything that happened with the Kirtland Safety Society anti-Bank-ing
Company.

I was recently watching a few lectures given by Susan Easton Black at
BYU about Joseph Smith and the history of the church. For those of you
who haven't heard the name Susan Black before, she's a prominent Mormon
historian/Joseph Smith apologist. She wrote Who's Who in the D&C, the 4
different 400 questions books, Finding Christ through the BoM, and over
100 other publications published by the church-owned propaganda company,
Deseret Book, and she used to be a BYU professor before retiring to
serve a mission in the Nauvoo Temple where she still resides, or at
least that was the last updated information I could find on her without
diving too deep. Anyway, I would recommend watching a video or two of
her lectures, there's a few in the show notes should it tickle your
fancy. If you know Mormon history, you'll notice that she tends to leave
out the majority of actual church history which puts things into
context. When we had Cognitive Dissonance on last episode, Cecil asked
how many Mormons know some of that stuff about Joseph Smith and my
answer was almost none. You wonder why that is, because people like
Susan Easton Black and Rod Meldrum know the real history and are only
telling parts of it which could be spun to show the Mormons and Joseph
Smith as victims of religious persecution.

Black hits on the high points of church history, Jo's leg operation,
Kirtland temple, KSS company, exodus to Missouri, Haun's Mill Massacre,
exodus to Illinois, and Carthage martyrdom, but every single one of
those points requires hours of getting lost in the weeds of church
history to truly understand and she chalks everything up to religious
persecution. When I see the Saints going through these various trials
and tribulations, the religion of Mormonism is such a fleeting aspect of
everything that happened to the Mormons. There's a naturalistic and
material explanation for everything the Mormons suffered. Joseph Smith
wasn't a prophet, he was just a dude looking out for his own dude
self-interests. Anyone who tries to sell what the Mormons experienced as
wholly religious persecution is either ignorant or dishonest, and real
historians should have no use for this vacuous nonsense.

Normally a dude like Jo just doing his dude thing isn't a problem for
anybody but the few people around him, but Jo was a massively public
figure with one of the largest single religious followings in America at
the time and everything he did in the 1840s effected thousands of people
directly and tens of thousands indirectly and these terrible business
deals are only one overturned car among a decade and a half long
trainwreck of terrible mistakes and ruin left in his wake. Anytime we
find historians painting a perfect picture of Jo, removing any smudges
or blemishes on his history, they are harming honest discourse and
damning a fruitful and academic conversation before it starts.

A quick word from this week's sponsor, Hello Fresh.

Hello Fresh

Let me share a little story with you guys. A while back I told you that
we're going to look into doing ads. Well, given my neurotic nature to
vet what I say in this show before it goes to air, it's taken some time
to find a product I feel comfortable endorsing and advertising for. This
week, I want to tell you about HelloFresh. Two nights ago, I was editing
some audio for another project I'm working on and my headphones don't
allow any outside noise to come in. Unbeknownst to me, there was a knock
at the door that I didn't hear. The next morning, as I'm sending Annie
out the door with her lunch box in hand, we open the door to find the
HelloFresh package awaiting our investigation. Here I thought, it's been
sitting outside all night, I wonder if all the food is still okay. I
brought it inside and opened the box and lo and behold, thanks to
HelloFresh's recyclable insulated smart packaging, it was colder inside
the box than it was in my fridge and all the food was just as fresh as
could be. Last night we chose the Cherry Drizzled Pork Chops for our
first meal and I have to say, it was an incredibly unique blend of sweet
and savory with grape tomatoes, lemon, shallots, cherries and cherry
jam, and all kinds of other delicious and healthy ingredients. It took
us 10 minutes to prep, barely half an hour to cook and with a little
cooling, we were eating a real home-cooked meal in 45 minutes with a
recipe and combination of flavors we've never tried before. All the
ingredients were packaged in perfect portions so there's no extra or
waste, which is always a problem in our house. Why buy an entire head of
parsley when all we need is a little bit to dress up a meal and the rest
eventually goes bad? HelloFresh is forging a new path of sustainable
Farm-to-Box meals with no food waste and exactly the ingredients you
need to get you off the couch and into the kitchen by simply going to
HelloFresh.com and signing up for one of their meal plans. Each week
their staff of dieticians and foodies create new delicious recipes with
step-by-step instructions designed to take less than 45 minutes from
prep to eat and it fosters that home-cooked feeling of the cooking
experience so you can focus on the fun of food preparation just as much
as the end result. They offer classic, vegetarian, and family boxes for
2-4 people, and you choose what nights you get deliveries with their
useful online service, they've even begun incorporating light, summer
meals and breakfast options to cover all your food related bases. You'll
pay less than \$10 a meal, and if you enter promo code Naked30, you'll
get \$30 off your first week of meal delivery service. But HelloFresh is
so much more than just food. They offer a plethora of unique kitchen
utensils and perfect pairing wines that can be shipped right to your
door with your week's delivery of food. If you've heard HelloFresh
advertised on other podcasts, it's because they're a good company with
high quality food, uninterruptible service, and they received an
"Excellent" rating on consumer reports for everything we've discussed
today. Stop waiting to sign up and just go for it, I promise it'll make
your life easier and reduce those pesky trips to the grocery store as
well as containers full of rotting food you never use. Go to
HelloFresh.com and use promo code Naked30. I've heard ads for HelloFresh
before but never tried it until now and I'm frankly sad I waited this
long. Join this growing movement of foodies getting perfect portions of
great tasting recipes delivered straight to our door for way cheaper
than eating out. Don't be like me and wait for so long to sign up
because this promo code probably won't expire, but all that extra food
in your fridge you never use will. Once again that's Hellofresh.com with
promo code Naked30.

And now, let's get into Mormon Leaks Minute...

MLM

New Patrons sign up for ad free edition of show

One time donation Geoffrey Tolle

Thank Jay Mumford!

MM...
