---
layout: post
title: Ep 69 - Mormon Apologist Debate
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-69-mormon-apologist-debate/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-69-mormon-apologist-debate
category: History
date: 2017-09-22 12:45:36 +0000
---

Ep 69 -- Mormon Apologist Debate

On this episode, we catch up with the Quorum of the Twelve apostles to
see how their missionary efforts were developing in Europe prior to
their departing England to make their way back to Nauvoo. They got in
some sight-seeing and spare no detail in reporting everything back to
the brethren on the other side of the pond. We continue to dive into a
number of newspaper articles covering the Mormon expansion efforts. To
round out the history for today, we feature a debate between a skeptic
and Mormon apologist, but it's not what you'd expect. After that, we'll
be talking to Mike who just posted an interesting analysis in the
ExMormon subreddit comparing Utah to the socialist utopia of Norway. At
least somebody listened to the teachings in the Book of Mormon about
socialism and wealth.

Links:

Utah Vs. Norway armchair experiment\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/708qxi/utah_vs_norway_an_armchair_experiment_norway_is/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Last episode we read a letter Jo sent to the Quorum of the Twelve still
on their mission in Europe, telling them to come home, but leave a few
brethren there to direct church affairs. Since Jo had sent them out on
this mission in late 1839, they had been doing God's work on the other
side of the pond and we've only briefly checked in with them a few times
during this mission reading a few letters of correspondence between them
and the leadership in Nauvoo from time to time.

In that same letter, Jo eluded to anti-Mormon sentiments which were
slowly arising in England in response to the mission preaching, and
those assertions weren't baseless. The Quorum of the Twelve were making
significant progress in converting and baptizing people, and for every
person baptized, two angry Christians were left in their wake balking at
the fanaticism and stupidity of the Mormon delusion. Let's catch up with
the quorum to see how things were progressing and how the European
citizens were reacting to their preaching.

With some milk to appetize our historical hunger, let's partake of meat
to satiate said hunger.

Preaching and dunking people weren't the only things the Quorum of the
Twelve apostles were doing in Europe. In addition to all their
proselyting, they were doing a fair bit of sight-seeing and reporting on
their findings. Let's begin with reading a few extracts from the HoC
about what they were doing on their P-days before we get to their actual
proselyting and the public reaction to how quickly Mormonism was
spreading.

The first bit we'll read are snippets from a letter sent by Heber C.
Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith to the brethren in
Nauvoo, dated 28 Oct 1840.

Vogel HoC vol 4 pg 228

"We will on this occasion make a few extracts from Elder Woodruff's
journal, concerning certain places which we visited.

On the 21^st^ of August, 1840, we visited the monument erected in
commemoration of the dreadful fire of London in the year 1666, built
under the inspection of that great architect, Sir Christopher Wren...

In addition to these were hundreds of churches, chapels, spires, and
monuments, standing in the midst of one universal dense mass of brick
and stone buildings; covering about six miles square of ground.

While viewing this scenery in a clear day, and beholding the streets and
bridges crowded with human beings of every rank and station, and with
beasts and vehicles of every kind, and the Thames covered with shipping,
from the skiff to the man-of-war, a Prussian traveler (citizen of
Berlin), who was standing by our side, exclaimed, "I have traveled over
Europe, and Asia, and other parts of the world, but I have never before
found a spot upon the face of the earth which presented to my view as
grand a scenery as the one now lying before us."...

On the 1^st^ day of September, we visited the Thames Tunnel, by
descending about 80 feet into the earth on the south side of the river,
and entering the archway on the left, which was finished 1120 feet, and
was beautifully lighted up with gas, we walked through it under the
Thames, with the river and shipping over our heads...

On the 24^th^ of August, we visited St. Paul's Cathedral, which was
first built by St. Augustine in the year \[A.D\] 610. It was destroyed
by fire in 961, and rebuilt the following year. It was not till the
reign of Athelstan that London became the metropolis of England, and it
was to this Prince, more perhaps than to any of his predecessors, that
the Cathedral of St. Paul was indebted for its permanent establishment
and preeminence...

On the 5^th^ of September, we visited Westminster Abbey, which is
composed of 11 chapels,...

In walking through this Abbey, we see frequent marks of violence from
Oliver Cromwell in defacing some of the tombs, monuments and brass work,
with which some of the Abbey was adorned...

While speaking upon this subject, we would not pass over our visit to
the House of Parliament, which is but a few rods from the Abbey. As we
entered the House of Lords, we did not behold so much to interest the
sight of the eye as the meditation of the mind; however we had the
privilege of resting ourselves by sitting in the chair in which the
Speaker of the House of Lords had sat for many years...

While retiring from this scenery, we had a view of British soldiers or
foot guards while on parade in St. James Park, accompanied by a full
band of music; also of the Queen's horse guards, well mounted upon black
horses, the bodies of the men covered with steel, which was glistening
in the sun...

We have visited the British Museum, which contains a vast number and
quantity of Egyptian sepulchers, mummies, hieroglyphics, and papyrus,
the history and account of which we feel much interested in, and may
forward you an account of the same in a future communication.

We subscribe ourselves your brethren in the new and everlasting
covenant,

H. C. Kimball

W. Woodruff

G. A. Smith"

Judging the mission trip from this letter alone, things seemed hunky
dory for the Quorum of the Twelve during their mission. They were
preaching, baptizing, printing periodicals and church materials
including the hymn book and Book of Mormon, and they even had some time
to relax and occasionally take in the sights. But, this is just one
small snapshot of nearly 2-year trip of constant proselyting which was
met with very mixed results. A few pages later in the HoC, it includes
an article which was printed in England in response to the Mormon
mission.

Let's read that newspaper extract which was reprinted by Ebenezer
Robinson in the Times and Season, which was subsequently included in the
History of the Church. This article says some interesting things, but
I'll tell you at the onset, of the newspaper articles we'll be reading
today, this is one of the mildest I've seen among a sea of hatred for
the Mormons.

Vogel HoC vol 4 pg 234

"To the editor of the Manx Liberal:\--

Sir: I feel rather surprised, and chagrined that that modern delusion,
viz, "Mormonism," should have made such rapid strides in this town,
hitherto considered exempt from the many systems of irreligious creeds
which about in England, America, and elsewhere. I had thought that the
powerful and argumentative addresses of the dissenting minsters would
have checked such a gross piece of imposition in its infancy, and thus
prevented the great mass of our town's people from becoming the dupes of
designing knaves,\--"and being led away by every wind of doctrine."..

O! Mr. Editor! I quake for the consequences;\--such a wholesale
conversion to Mormonism was never before witnessed in any town or
country. What will become of our society? What will become of our class
meetings? What will become of our brethren in the faith? And above all,
what will become of poor Mr. Hays, that nice and humble man, who so
nobly stood forward to expose the errors of the Mormons system; God
bless him, and preserve him from want! But Mr. Editory, what makes the
case worse is, that a rumor is prevalent that all these pious men are to
be baptized!---that is, duly immersed in the salt water of Douglas Bay,
by that abominable creature, Taylor!! Surely there must be something
enchanting about the vile man. Immersion!! (My hand shakes while I
write)---and in winter too!!! Oh sir! The thought chills my very
soul;\--surely this American dipper intends to drown them---he can have
no other object in view; therefore, brethren of the Methodist society,
beware!! Drowning is not to be envied, and that too in your sins...In
conclusion brethren, I recommend you to read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest the things which belong to your eternal peace, and listen no
longer to the follies of men.

Duke street, Douglas, 29 Oct 1840"

As I said, this was pretty mild in comparison to a few other articles
we'll be reading. It does, however, point to an interesting trend in the
mission. The Mormons were obviously making some headway with converts.
Hundreds of people had been baptized by late autumn of 1840, and the
Europeans were reacting similarly to how Americans were reacting when
the Mormons would move into an area and begin baptizing people in
droves. There was outcry. People were pissed that Mormonism was a
provable delusion and many of these Christians considered Jo Smith and
the Mormons to be against the will of the true God, which made them and
the missionaries out to be pawns of the devil, sent to draw the masses
away from God's one true word.

With proper thanks given to the internet as an amorphous all-knowing
entity, it's incredibly easy to track down newspaper articles of any
given time or place, the majority of which are cataloged and indexed for
easy searching. Let's read a few that come up with a cursory search of
britishnewspaperarchive.

Gloucestershire Chronicle Saturday 19 Dec 1840:

"The following facts relative to the "Latter-day Saints" are chiefly
derived from the pamphlets published by the Revs. W. J. Morrish and J.
Symons, to which we recently alluded, and which have been largely
distributed particularly in the Ledbury district. We are sorry to learn
that the infection has reached the neighbourhood of this city, in
localities distant from any church...

'It has been ascertained that the wife of the very man who wrote what
they call the 'Book of Mormon' is now living in Monson, Massachusetts.
Since the death of her former husband she has married a second husband
named Davidson, and is a woman of irreproachable character and a
Christian. Two reverend gentlemen are ready to bear witness that her
testimony is worth of full confidence. The book which the Mormonites
aver was written by God himself was procured in the following manner, as
detailed by Mr. Morrish, upon the testimony of Mrs. Davidson.'"

Then it goes on to give us the short take on how the Spalding theory got
legs by telling us the whole story from the citizens of Ashtabula
county's perspective, even detailing John Spalding's outburst when he
learned his brother's book had been coopted by Joseph and Rigdon to
manufacture a new Christianity. Then it reprints some extracts from
Mormonism Unveiled by Eber Howe about the character of the Smith family
as well as their reputation in New York prior to publishing the Book of
Mormon. It ends with this passage...

"In a publication called the 'Book of Doctrine and Covenants,' published
by the mormonites, but which they are careful in not putting into the
hands of their professed members generally, it is pretty clearly shewn
that 'filthy lucre' is the only object which they seek to obtain. The
following passages are addressed to the Mormon preachers or lecturers
who are sent out to obtain converts, and these are set for the as divine
revelations and instructions:\--

'Whoso feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in no wise
lose his reward; and he that doeth not these things is not my disciple;
by this ye may know my disciples.' ....... 'And let all the monies which
can be spared, it mattereth not unto me whether it be little or much, be
sent up unto the land of Zion, unto those whom I have appointed to
receive.' ....... 'Impart a portion of thy property; yea, even part of
thy lands, and all save the support of thy family. Pay the debt thou has
contracted with the printer.'

There are many other similar passages in the same book all tending to a
like purport---the supply of money to the preachers. So that according
to the doctrines which they preach no one refusing them money can belong
to their society. This is intelligible enough, and it is matter of
considerable surprise that in this boasted age of enlightenment and
education, there could be found individuals who could be cheated with
their eyes open by such a system of humbug."

Shrewsbury Chronicle Friday 27 November 1840:

"The Latter-day Saints

We gave in the Shrewsbury Chronicle, on the 13^th^ inst. A detailed
account of a strange sect calling themselves "Mormonites," or
"Latter-day Saints," which are spreading their wild doctrines among
ignorant persons in the rural districts in Gloucestershire and
Herefordshire...

We have had kindly placed into our hands for a few hours, but not
sufficiently long to enable us to attentively peruse them, the
celebrated "Book of Mormon" and a series, comprising the numbers from
May to October, of a monthly periodical published at Manchester, called
"The Latter-Day Saints' Millennial Star." We have been surprised, not to
say shocked, at the evidence which this magazine affords of the sudden
growth of these fanatics; for that they must now be a numerous body is
certain from the simple fact that a magazine especially intended for
circulation among themselves, can find readers enough to make it worth
while for a publisher to issue it. But besides this inferential mode of
calculating the numbers of the body, the magazine affords some
statistical tables, from which we see that the 'saints' in England must
unquestionably amount to thousands, and that no inconsiderable item of
their numbers is to be found in their converts in Gloucestershire and
Herefordshire. Still, from all we can understand of the matter from a
cursory perusal of the books which we have seen, we should say that we
are confirmed in an opinion we formerly expressed, that no very serious
social evil is to be apprehended from this sect, and that provided they
escape persecution, the sure method of swelling the ranks of zealots,
the imposture will soon be exploded, after having probably produced one
good result,\--that of opening the eyes of Ministers in the
Establishment and of the Dissenting denominations to the great mass of
ignorance and consequent superstitious credulity, which exists in this
country...

From the knowledge I now possess respecting the Latter Day Saints, their
printing press at Manchester, their Books of Mormon, of which thousands
are circulating, their various clever publications, their interested
priesthood, and admirable scheme for raising money, I have not the least
doubt but it will require all the exertion of the clergy, of every
honest man, and wellwisher of his country, with the influence of the
press, to eradicate these fanatical opinions; nothing but kindness and
attention on the part of both clergy and laity will succeed; the lower
classes must be taught the common principles of Christianity, which at
present they do not know, and then, and not till then, will the fatal
heresy pass away. Government ought to interfere; our present plan of
education, as regards country parishes, is worse than a farce; it is
downright hypocrisy; nothing less, than cheating both rich and poor, the
one out of their money, and the other out of their instruction. I trust
that I have now given such a brief statement as may induce others to
investigate this matter, for many clergymen of my acquaintance were not
aware of the poison covertly spreading throughout their parishes"

The Scotsman Wednesday 23 December 1840

"Religious Imposters---Mormonism.---Many of our readers will be aware
that a set of imposters, calling themselves Mormonites, have for several
months back been busy in disseminating their tenets in this city, and
attempting to entice the ignorant and unwary to join their ranks. The
sect had its origin some years ago in America---from whence a few
adventurers have lately come, in order to circulate their opinions in
this country. One of these pretends to be an apostle, and declares that
he has had intercourse with angels. They also assert that by a
particular revelation they became possessed of a book called the Book of
Mormon, of equal authority with the Bible; and that they have the power
of working miracles, and of speaking in unknown tongues, &c. The
absurdity of these pretensions should have rendered them harmless but we
understand that they have already entrapped a considerable number of
individuals. The book called the Book of Mormons, was, we understand,
written by the late Rev. Solomon Spaulding, a retired clergyman, who
resided in New Salem, America. It is, in fact, nothing more than a
religious romance, in the style and phraseology of Scripture...

The adventurers we have now alluded to, imagined, no doubt, that their
distance from the scene of the original imposture would screen them from
detection; but we hope the facts here stated, will serve to put
individuals on their guard."

Luckily, searching these newspaper databases is much easier now than it
was even a decade ago, much less for the entire 170 years Mormon history
research has been conducted up to this point. I found a debate in a
paper called the Herford Mercury and Reformer which summarizes a public
debate conducted between a Mormon Missionary who converted from being a
Methodist preacher named George Jones Adams. He founded a small
schismatic Mormonism in Palestine after Jo's death, but only after he
was inducted as an elder and joined the Council of Fifty. He'd been
baptized by Heber C. Kimball about 9 months before this confrontation.
His challenger, Mr. Mallows couldn't come up with any convincing
arguments against Mormonism, but then somebody from the spectating crowd
emerged slowly with a pipe in his mouth and a wealth of knowledge
imprinted into his skull. Mr. White was the town skeptic who owned and
operated a bookstore. Mr. White had heard of Mormonism and had read Eber
Howe's Mormonism Unvailed. He had spent the debate watching anxiously as
the Mormon apologist, Mr. Adams had squirreled out from under every
criticism, and he was fed up with the situation. As everybody was ready
to disband, Mr. White, Heisenberg as we'll call him for the purposes of
this debate, began with some simple questions for our Mormon apologist,
Mr. Adams, or, Peter, as well nickname him for the purposes of this
debate. So sets our scene for a debate series which lasted 3 weeks
between skeptic Heisenberg and Peter the apologist.

Part of why the Mormons became popular so quickly was because they went
viral. Without TV and the myriad pacifiers we spend our free-time on
today, whatever outside force shook up the community became the hot
topic of discussion, and that's what happened when the Q12 first
appeared on the scene in England and were having prolific success. In
the wake of their mission, thousands of people who'd only heard of the
Mormons in passing conversation or international newspaper articles
suddenly had a neighbor who was Mormon. The Mormons were a curiosity to
the Europeans, but were also seen as heretical to the pious elite. When
the first installment of this debate occurred, it was just a preacher
talking to a Mormon preacher in a chapel, and hardly anybody was
interested. Once Mr. White, our Heisenberg, stepped up to the stage,
people lost their shit. Everybody in the community flocked to the
chapel. With standing-room only, they were forced to leave the doors
open so the masses standing outside could hear the proceedings of the
debate. Let's get into it.

"Important Discussion on the Merits of Mormonism:\--

For a considerable time past the town and neighbourhood of Bedford have
been convulsed with the preachings, baptizings, and denouncings of the
Mormons, or Latter-day Saints. Families have been weaned away from
several of the old congregations, and lured to join the new sect. An
apostle from the Zion of the church (The United States), by name Mr. G.
J. Adams, has crossed the Atlantic, and visited the "Heathen of
England," for the purpose of making converts to the new faith! He has
taken up his abode in Bedford, and unceasingly proclaims the principles
of Mormon. At one of his meetings several questions were put to him by
one of the audience, which ultimately led to a discussion at the Castle
Rooms. The discussion began on Wednesday evening last, and was first
maintained principally by the aforesaid Mr. Adams, and a plain, sensible
man named Mallows. At the close of the meeting, however, Mr. White, the
bookseller, expressed a wish to address a few words to the assembly. He
began by stating that from what he had heard, he presumed it to be the
object of Mr. Adams to introduce the Book of Mormon and the other books
of the sect as a new revelation from heaven, supplementary to the Bible;
he (Mr. White) therefore wished to lay before the meeting a succinct
history of the book called the Book of Mormon. It was pretended that it
was a translation made from the Egyptian, the original being engraved on
gold plates, which were taken from the earth in North America by an
angel, and given to one Joseph Smith, who, by the help of the long-lost
Urim and Thummim, which was given to him at the same time, translated
them into the English tongue. (This is where Mr. White brings the
slap-down)

Now, his very slight knowledge of the Egyptian character told him, that
at the very least it would take 500 gold plates of the size mentioned (7
inches by 8 inches), to contain the aforesaid book; and this it was said
was only part of the original---and these 500 plates would weigh at
least four hundred weight. He (Mr. W.) would therefore like to know
whether Mr. Joseph Smith could carry this alone, or whether the angel
helped him. The value of these plates would be at the lowest computation
25,000£, which would fully account for the fact that these plates had
never been brought to England. Further, Mr. W. observed, as this was an
entirely new revelation, he considered that it ought to be
authenticated, as former heavenly missions were, by a display of
miraculous powers. When Moses was sent to Pharaoh, God gave him
miraculous powers. When the Law came from Sinai, there were thunderings
and lightnings and an earthquake. When Christ came, the angels appeared
to the shepherds. And a miraculous star guided the wise men. And when
the apostles preached, the Word of the Lord confirmed it by signs
following. Now he (Mr. W.) in the name of the meeting, simply asked Mr.
Adams to authenticate his revelation in the same way; and he did this
with the more confidence, because Mr. A. had said that no church does
not possess the power of working miracles can be the true church---and
that the Church of the Latter-Day Saints certainly does possess those
powers---"then (continued Mr. W. addressing Mr. A.) there really, sir,
can be no difficulty here-only work us a miracle and we shall be willing
to receive your book;\--not an equivocal one, but a plain, manifest, and
honest miracle (BOOOOM!!!). There is in the town an old gentleman who
has not seen the light for many years, suppose you open his eyes---or if
you like it better, go with us to the neighbouring grave-yard and raise
a dead body and in either case we pledge ourselves to receive you, as
you pretend to be a prophet sent from God" (cheers)\[that's really in
there!\].

Mr. Adams made a few remarks after this, and concluded by challenging
his opponent to meet him on the following evening."

He declined performing a miracle, doesn't that mean that he didn't truly
believe it at some level? If he truly thought himself to be ministering
for the one true church, why wouldn't he accept the challenge with full
sincerity knowing for a fact that he could perform a miracle because God
had his back?

"On the following evening these two gentlemen again met, and as it was
deemed requisite for the sake of order that a chairman should be
elected, Mr. J. Wyatt was called to sustain that office, who laid down
the rules of the discussion, that each speaker should be allowed half an
hour, and that both speakers were to be heard without interruption.

Mr. Adams opened the discussion by stating that his opponent was
mistaken in what he had said about the Egyptian language, for the
peculiar character of that language was that a great deal could be got
into a little space(HAHAHAHAHA not exactly a testable claim, even
today)---but supposing that there might be the weight that Mr. W. talked
of---did not Samson carry the gates of Gaza? Did he not catch 300 foxes?
And did he not slay a thousand men with the jaw bone of an ass? (What
about all the other people that 'hefted' the plates, were they
super-powered too?) But according to his opponent the power of God was
limited now---he referred to the Bible and by that he would abide. Mr.
A. then quoted the 49^th^ chap. Genesis 22^nd^ and 24^th^ v., "Joseph is
a fruitful bough," &c.,\--but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of
his hands were made strong by the God of Jacob" (from thence is the
Shepherd the stone of Israel). And this text he considered in connexion
with the 26^th^ v., where it was said "the blessing of thy father have
prevailed unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills"---clearly
proved in his mind that the descendants of Joseph were to introduce a
new dispensation, for the Shepherd of Israel could not mean Christ, as
he did not come from Joseph but from Judah---and if from Egypt, where
Jacob was when he pronounced this blessing, you were to calculate, what
was the "utmost bound"---you would find that it was the far west of
America where this book was found, which book actually revealed that the
North American Indians were the descendants of Joseph. He then quoted
the 29^th^ chap. Of Isaiah, 11^th^ and following verses, where a book
was mentioned which neither the learned nor the unlearned could read,
and this he considered clearly proved that a book was foretold---and as
neither the learned nor the unlearned could read the Book of Mormon when
it was found he had no doubt that that was the book intended. He further
referred to that passage of Ezekiel where the prophet was commanded to
take two sticks, one for Judah and one for Joseph---sticks were ancient
record---and by reasoning which we confess not clearly to have
understood, he affirmed that these sticks pointed to a new revelation,
which he had no doubt was now made by the Book of Mormon."

What the hell did that have to do with how heavy the gold fucking plates
were? I'm astonished to see braindead monkeyshit illogical apologetics
being birthed so early in Mormon history. These are criticisms I would
bring up against an apologist today, doesn't that say something about
the significant problems in church history if they're still running from
the same answers 175 years later?

"Mr. White (slowly putting the fractured pieces of his own brain back
together after such an impudent and ignorant screed), in reply, shortly
explained the texts referred to. The first, he said, did not foretell
that the Shepherd of Israel should come from Joseph, as his opponent had
alleged, but from the "God of Jacob"; and in the text quoted from
Isaiah, the prophet, did not say that there should be a book---but that
the words of the prophet, foretelling the judgments coming upon
Jerusalem, were so awful, astonishing, and incomprehensible, as to be
like a sealed book. It was merely a simile; and as to the sticks of
Ezekiel, it was nothing more than a forcible way common among the
prophets of old of expressing their meaning, which in this case he took
to be that, though the tribe of Judah and the other tribes were
separated they should come together again. But supposing that the
interpretations given by Mr. A. were correct, what had they to do with
the Book of Mormon? (nice way to chase off that red-herring and get back
to a relevant question.)

Supposing that the Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel did mean that a book
should be found, what proof had they that the Book of Mormon was the
book? He again demanded that it should be authenticated by a miracle.
(YEEEESSSHHHH!!!!!) He then proceeded to lay open some of the
absurdities of this book. It professed to be a narrative of the flight
of some Jews from Jerusalem in the reign of Zedekiah; and the first
proof of its forgery he would adduce would be found in page 53, where it
mentioned a mariner's compass having been used about 1900 years before
the discovery of that instrument. Perhaps his opponent would get out of
this difficulty by alleging that God could teach the use of the compass
though it had not been discovered by men; a convenient, but he (Mr. W.)
apprehended not a very satisfactory mode. He further noticed that the
book could not have been written when it professed to have been, as in
it there were numerous instances of Greek words being used---such as
Christ, Jesus, Alpha, Omega, by a people who at that time could not have
known anything about Greek. But one of the strongest arguments that the
book was a gross imposture, was the following fact:\--It was said that
this book was translated by Joseph Smith from the Egyptian character,
but on referring to its pages, he found that all the quotations from
Scripture with which the book abounded, were exactly in the words of our
authorized version! Now a coincidence of this kind was utterly
impossible. (Going to anachronisms and Bible plagiarism in the Book of
Mormon, I fuckin love this guy!) He would produce to them a copy of a
Greek Testament, with six translations, and read a line of each (Mr. W.
here produced a part of Bagster's Hexapla, and read a line or two of
each translation.) By this it would be seen that the words were in every
case different, although the sense was the same, and if 500 people were
each to undertake the same task, the language of no two of the 500 would
be the same. He therefore would ask his opponent how Joseph Smith
happened to hit exactly upon the very words of our translators. But
further, it was alleged that he (Joseph Smith) translated by
inspiration; and it might therefore be said that he was inspired to use
the same words as our translators used; but our translation was
imperfect. In many parts it was acknowledged by all to be wrong; and yet
Mr. Smith, inspired as he was, adopted all our blunders. Perhaps Mr.
Adams could satisfactorily explain this; otherwise he must be contented
to have his book scouted as an imposture. At all events he (Mr. A.)
could not be surprised if a miracle was again demanded to authenticate a
book with so much suspicion about it.

Mr. Adams in reply did little but reiterate the arguments that he before
adduced from the three texts of Scripture above quoted, affirming that
Mr. White had not, as he (Mr. A.) had wished, gone to the Bible, but had
talked very learnedly about the Greek language; but that was the way
with this generation. He, however, was for bringing everything to the
Bible.

Mr. White again answered the Scriptures quoted, and then proceeded to
say that, in a book which professed to give a history of the Book of
Mormon, he found it stated that a copy of part of the writing on the
plates had been submitted to Professor Anthon, of New York. This
gentleman he very well knew by reputation; and if it had been stated
that the learned professor had seen the plates, the matter would have
assumed a different complexion, but as it stood this name went for
nothing. At the end of the book there were two testimonials, signed by a
number of individuals, who stated that they had seen the plates; but
these names had no places of abode or occupation affixed, and therefore
could not be of any weight. (YEESSS! Going after the credibility of the
3 and 8 witnesses. This Mr. White is classic Heisenberg) Such names
would not get a cheque for 5£ cashed at the bank; and would any one
trust his immortal soul to such unsatisfactory testimony? In conclusion
he had a word or two to say to his opponent. It was in his (Mr. W.'s)
opinion no trifling matter, to be a leader of the people. Were he the
editor of a newspaper, he should never put his pen to paper without
remembering the responsibility of being even a political leader of men's
opinions; but how much graver a matter it must be to be a leader in
concerns which affected men's eternal interests; and he had never talked
to a truly conscientious minister on the subject, without finding that
his responsibility was felt at times almost too great to be borne.
(Interesting point. Now it seems he's making the argument that what Jo
and this missionary are doing is actually immoral because they're
tampering with people's eternal salvation.) But his opponent had not
only started as a leader, but had attempted to lead men entirely away
from the old and beaten paths to Heaven. He (Mr. W.) would seriously
warn him that this could not be a light and trifling matter. If his
followers fell into his snare, with their eyes open, doubtless they
would perish; but if so, what, in the great day of account, would be the
doom of the man, who, not satisfied with his own ruin, had labored hard
to allure his fellow-creatures to destruction?

The meeting then separated."

Mr. Adams and Mr. White weren't done taking intellectual swings at each
other, because they did meet again the second debate was published in
the next week's edition of the Herford Mercury and Reformer. They went
back and rehashed all the same points they hit on in the first debate
with Mr. White never relenting on the same damning points, while Mr.
Adams continued to grandstand, red-herring, and evade. However, Mr.
White did hit Adams on the Mormons condoning slavery, which England had
the historic high ground over America in that regard having outlawed it
decades prior to this, so Adams answered by saying the condoning of
slavery was issued to keep the Mormons from being persecuted in
Missouri, which obviously didn't work. The crowd really didn't like it.
This is how their second debated concluded:

"Mr. White, in reply, said that when Joseph Smith and his accomplices
repented as the persons alluded to had done, there would be no objection
to their again being received into the Church---and they might even
become its teachers if possessed of the necessary abilities...

The Chairman then announced that the discussion on the subject of the
Book of Mormon was closed, and he should take the sense of the meeting
as to whether Mr. Adams had, by Scripture and reason, proved that the
Book of Mormon was authentic, or whether it was a vile imposture. He
called for a show of hands, when there appeared in favour of the
Mormonites about half-a-dozen, and against them more than five hundred.
Order having been obtained, the chairman stated that the Latter-day
Saints had collected pence at the door of all who attended the meeting,
upon the understanding that it was merely to defray the expenses
attendant on the discussion. The meeting was anxious to know what had
been collected; he had therefore called in the money takers, and found
that after paying the whole expense, there remained a balance in hand of
3£ 2s... As this was public money, he should take the sense of the
meeting as to the disposal of it.

It was then proposed by Mr. White, and seconded in several parts of the
room, that Mr. Wyatt, the chairman, should hold the money until
Christmas-day, and then see that it was given to the inmates of the
union workhouse in roast beef and plum pudding."

They had a final exchange, which apostle Orson Hyde, as we know him,
L'Chydem, who was on his way to his mission in the holy land, and
L'Chydem brought with him a Doctrine and Covenants to prove that there
was no passage condoning slavery. Mr. White took it as an opportunity to
show how much Mormonism was clearly a Multi-level Marketing scheme in
response. It follows in the 29 May 1841 publication:

"Mr. Wyatt then repeated the charge of upholding slavery, and commented
on the apostle's explanation of the passage in the book when he said
they did not preach the gospel to the slaves without the consent of
their masters, because it would subject them to the persecution of the
masters. So impudent an avowal, said Mr. Wyatt, as this, speaks louder
than the host of arguments which might be brought against the awful
creed, and can produce but one impression upon the meeting, namely that
it is what he before denounced it to be a wicked imposture to raise
money for the support of the fellows Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, Sidney
Rigdon and the remainder of the apostles of the Mormonite settlement.
They do not believe it right to interfere with bond-servants and slaves
and preach the gospel to them, why?---because they know that it would
prevent the present compact between them, the Mormons and the selfish
slave-owners for keeping their fellow-creatures in abject slavery and
filling the coffers of their treasury. The person who has just delivered
the lecture refused to let him have the book, or he would have read to
you a passage or two which would still more have convinced you that the
object of these wicked men is fraud; their soul is gain, and they care
nothing for your spiritual or temporal welfare so long as they can
persuade you to fill their pockets.

Mr. Adams replied, and said he was willing to shew the book to any
person who would call on him (hisses), and that he should for the future
give a lecture nightly at Mr. Mayle's room. He solemnly declared that he
devoutly believed in the principles of Mormon and that the was willing
to be a martyr in the cause. Since he had been here (in Bedford) threats
had been extended to him, and one person had expressed his readiness to
shoot him (loud cries of "Name, name"). He did not know the name but had
been told as much (hisses).

Mr. Wyatt then said he regretted that such a charge had been preferred
against the people of Bedford upon a hearsay, and added, that such was
his good opinion of the people that he would hold himself responsible
for any harm done to the apostles of Mormon so long as they acted with
decorum (cheers). Mr. Wyatt concluded by begging the audience not to pin
their faith upon the doctrines of Mormon and quoted the 2^nd^ Epistle of
Peter 2^nd^ chapter, where false prophets are foretold who through
covetousness should "with feigned words make merchandize of the people"
(Hear, hear).

Mr. Adams then dissolved the meeting, and we are strongly of opinion
that this is the last demonstration that will be made by the Mormons."

It must have been because that was the last article from that paper
covering the Mormons for another 3 months. Mr. Adams must have slinked
away, tail tucked firmly betwixt his nuts and never returned to Bedford.

All it takes is a learned man debating a Mormon missionary to cause a
spectacle and send the Mormon on their way with no answers and the
crowd's laughter and hisses ringing in their ears. One thing I can't
help but notice is that the same problems scholars and historians have
with the Book of Mormon today are the same exact arguments critical
thinkers were bringing a decade after it was published, and just like
the 19^th^-century Mormons had no answer for these myriad criticisms,
Mormons today can't answer them any better today, even with the massive
depth of new scholarship and research that's being conducted daily on
their behalf.

On one hand, it's kind of sad to think that the arguments haven't
changed for nearly 2 centuries, and they likely won't change for another
2 centuries because these are foundational issues with hard truth claims
the church makes. On the other hand, according to this reporter, the
crowd was resoundingly in favor of the skeptic's arguments and the
Mormons were laughed out of the room, with only a half-dozen out of the
500 in attendance still espousing belief in the religion. If we have a
margin of error in public debates with Mormon apologists of 1%, that
doesn't speak well to the viability of the church's teachings. It just
goes to show, regardless of the time, place, or specific skeptic who's
asking the questions, the Book of Mormon, and by extension, the Mormon
religion, will never stand up to the harsh white-hot light of scrutiny.

Mike Interview

With Utah being one of the most notoriously red states and capitalism
being one of the few underlying platforms on which the GOP runs, it's
important to take a step back and see what God has to say about what the
perfect society would be. When we examine the teachings in the Book of
Mormon and D&C, some interesting trends begin to emerge, one of which is
the communal or socialistic aspect. It just so happens that we're joined
today by Mike who made an amazing post on the exmormon subreddit, and
he\'s going to educate us on some hard statistics in comparison to model
cities put forth in the Book of Mormon.

This could be construed as a miracle:

"Curious accident.---On Tuesday last, a horse ran away in the
High-street, Bedford, with a cart load of bricks, and galloped down the
street at a tremendous space. Upon reaching the bridge the axletree
broke, the wheels flew off, and the cart fell with a sudden shock, which
threw the bricks over the horse, covering him to all appearance in his
last brick grave. Assistance was rendered, and it was discovered that
the horse had entirely escaped injury; not having received even a broken
knee."
