---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 80 - CC Polygamy Pt3 The Stone Rolls Forth'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-80-cc-polygamy-pt3-stone-rolls-forth/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-80-cc-polygamy-pt3-the-stone-rolls-forth
category: History
date: 2017-12-08 03:04:43 +0000
---

Ep 80 -- CC Polygamy Pt3 The Stone Rolls Forth

On this episode, we cover the major sprouts of Mormonism which sprang
from the fertile religion Nauvoo soil. From the Strangites, to
Whiteites, to Josephites, to Brighamites, to Godbeites, and back to
Brighamites again, every major faction of Mormonism seems to have a
highly polarized stance on polygamy. Politics plays it's role as laws
are passed in attempt to outlaw the twins of barbarism, slavery and
polygamy, largely aimed at curtailing the religious overreach of the
Mormon theocracy in Utah. This is part 3 in a multi-part series on the
history of polygamy.

Links:

Opposition to Mormon Polygamy in Utah\
<http://ilovehistory.utah.gov/time/stories/polygamy.html>

Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morrill_Anti-Bigamy_Act>

James Strang\
<http://www.strangstudies.org/James_Jesse_Strang/>

Lyman Wight\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/lyman-wight>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyman_Wight>

Whiteite Polygamy\
<https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1042&context=usupress_pubs>

Alpheus Cutler\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/alpheus-cutler>\
<http://ir.uiowa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=10632&context=annals-of-iowa>

Joseph Smith III\
<http://www.josephsmithjr.org/history/children/70-joseph-smith-iii>\
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V20N04_107.pdf>

Saints Herald 1860 archive\
<http://www.latterdaytruth.org/pdf/100137.pdf>

Buchanan's Blunder War of 1857-58\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utah_War>

Poland Act of 1874\
<http://www.famous-trials.com/mountainmeadows/933-the-poland-act>

James A. Garfield Inaugural Address 4 March 1881\
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=25823>

Assassination of Garfield, trial of Charles Guiteau\
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/1100203?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>

George F. Edmunds\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_F._Edmunds>

Edmunds Anti-Polygamy Act 1882\
<http://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h734.html>

Grover Cleveland 8 Dec 1885 annual address\
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=29526>

John Taylor\
<https://www.lds.org/churchhistory/presidents/controllers/potcController.jsp?leader=3&topic=facts>

Wilford Woodruff\
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Woodruff,_Wilford>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilford_Woodruff>

1890 Manifesto---Official Declaration 1\
<https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/od/1>

Supreme Court Ruling upholding Edmunds-Tucker Act\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Late_Corp._of_the_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-Day_Saints_v._United_States>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

We're continuing our slow meander through Mormon polygamy, a topic which
dozens of historians have solely dedicated their lives to studying. As
we examine Mormon polygamy, we can only hit on the high points in these
episodes as we rip through more than a century and a half of history
spanning thousands of miles and tens of thousands of people. We'll leave
it to the regular historical timeline to dive much deeper into the high
points we're hitting on in these episodes and talk about the people who
lived through Mormonism.

For part 3 of our discussion on Mormon polygamy, we're going to focus
particularly on the history of polygamy in Utah during the Brighamite
era and other competing factions in other locations leading up to the
first manifesto in 1890. We won't be spending all our time on the
Brighamites, but they were particularly prominent in the public eye when
it came to laws regarding polygamy, so much of our conversation will
focus on Utah polygamy.

Let's begin with Brigham Young. After Joseph and Hyrum Smiths' deaths in
June of 1844, a bitter succession crisis gripped the Mormons. James
Strang emerged with a prophetic claim to the throne and would eventually
take nearly half the Mormons with him to Beaver Island and other
locations outside Nauvoo. A small contingency of Mormons remained in
Illinois eagerly awaiting the maturation of Joseph Smith's son, Joseph
III, who would inherit the familial prophetic mantle. The other half of
the unclaimed Mormon population followed the quorum of the Twelve headed
by Brigham Young who assumed the office of President over the Brighamite
Mormons and subsequently brought them out to the Great Basin of Utah and
settled massive swaths of land inhabited only by First-Nationers.

One of the primary points of contention between these competing factions
of Mormonism was the argument over polygamy. Mother Emma and the
majority of the Mormons remaining in Illinois were viciously opposed to
polygamy and most of the scholarship dedicated to proving Joseph never
practiced polygamy has come from the Reorganized LDS church. To this
day, the reorganized church which has become the Community of Christ has
never espoused Joseph's revelation on polygamy included in the
Brighamite D&C 132.

Immediately after Joseph's death, the uncertainty accompanying the
succession crisis was felt by every Mormon. Was it best to follow the
great orator Sidney Rigdon who had recently made a resurgence into the
elite with Joseph's selection of him as his vice-presidential candidate?
Rigdon was Joseph's second in command throughout his most charismatic
years in Kirtland and he hated polygamy, but he wasn't garnering as much
support as the Quorum of the Twelve. Was it best to go with the majority
of the witnesses to the gold plates who followed James Strang along with
the final remaining Smith Brother, William Smith? They were also opposed
to polygamy, but the only thing designating James Strang as Joseph's
rightful successor was a spurious letter he claimed to have. Strang was
still new to the Mormon movement, he hadn't suffered through everything
the rest of the Mormons had, did he really understand the overarching
plight of the average Mormon? What about following the Quorum of the
Twelve, was that the best option? Many of them were practicing polygamy,
and Joseph had dictated in a revelation during the organization of the
Quorum in 1835 that they hold the keys to the priesthood in the event
the presidency is unable to perform their duties. Was Brigham Young
really prophetically inclined enough to be the next charismatic leader
of a visionary movement, or was he better as a businessman?

These were the choices every Mormon faced in the few years following the
death of the prophet and patriarch of the church. No pressure, it was
just their eternal salvation held in the balance pending their choice.
Each one claimed to be the one true church, how do you know which one is
correct?

Each faction which broke from Nauvoo considered different men to be the
divinely inspired and the rightful heir to the charismatic throne left
vacant. Each faction had their own justifications for why they were the
one true religion while all the other sects of Mormonism were infidels.
To talk about so many factions of Mormonism, let's craft a functional
analogy for today's episode.

Picture, if you will, a small chunk of trees in a small colony in the
forest like the quaking aspens near Fish Lake in Utah. Every tree in
this colony shares the same root system and comes from the same soil.
When one tree dies in the colony, the root system cuts it off and
sprouts up replacements. Anytime forest fires encroach on this colony,
it seems pleased as the fires merely clear ground of pesky vegetation
trying to steal nutrients from the tree colony so it's able to expand.
Some of the clones combine into other trees, others are insufficiently
large or become diseased and the root system kills them off to feed the
others. Each tree in this colony has the same genetic code, all being
clones sprouting off the same root system, but each is slightly
different. Their eyes are in different places. Their bark looks
different from tree to tree. No two trees have the exact same branching
pattern. Some are large and stout, others can barely obtain enough
nutrients to grow larger than a twig-sprout. All of them have the same
genetic code and come from the same soil, so an outsider would be at
pains to distinguish one tree from another, but every tree is unique in
some way.

The Mormon movement in Nauvoo prior to the death of the prophet
cultivated the perfect soil and root system for dozens of religious
factions to sprout which all shared Mormon memes. Every one of the
hundreds of Mormonisms which exist today all share this common Nauvoo
root system. We're going to track a few of the major sprouts as they
progress through their life cycle and we'll be focusing on the Memetic
marker of polygamy and how its practice played out in each differing
iteration of Mormonism.

STRANGITE

The first memetic sprout we're going to discuss was the most prominent
and largest sprout coming out of Nauvoo. About 12,000 Mormon ended up
following a man named James Strang, many of whom were opposed to Brigham
Young's practice of polygamy. Strang was publicly opposed to polygamy in
Nauvoo when he was a member, this put him in the running as a very
appealing charismatic successor to those who didn't believe Joseph Smith
ever practiced polygamy. Soon after Strang established his HQ on Beaver
Island in 1848, he succumbed to the counsel of the recently
excommunicated John C. Bennett and other polygamy advocates and made an
abrupt shift from publicly decrying polygamy to secretly practicing it.
His first wife, Mary Pierce, left him after he took a second wife named
Elvira Eliza Field, after which he subsequently married three more
women. Those who'd joined Strang for his opposition to polygamy were
quickly disenchanted and the membership numbers of Strangite Mormon
sprout dwindled for the next half decade until Strang's public
assassination in June 1856, almost 12 years to the day after the Smiths
were assassinated in Carthage.

Eventually the Strang movement would largely be absorbed by the
reorganization under Joseph III, but a few hundred people would remain
loyal to Strang and continue to adhere to his teachings under the banner
of Strangite Mormonism. There are still a few Strangite families to this
day. When we get into 1844, James Strang will appear in our historical
timeline and we'll continue to follow the progression of the Strangites
from there. For our purposes we just need to bear in mind that polygamy
was a hotly disputed issue which divided more than just the Brighamite
and RLDS sprouts. Polygamy was a topic which sewed divisions within
numerous Mormon sects, Strangite included.

WHITITE

A very small and geographically isolated sprout of Mormonism cropped up
under Lyman Wight's supervision. Wight was a diehard faithful follower
of Joseph Smith. He'd been designated a General of the Army of Israel
during the 1838 Mormon war in Missouri and took the office of apostle in
place of Captain Fearnaught David W. Patten after his death in the
battle of Crooked River. Prior to Joseph's death, in a meeting of the
Council of Fifty, Joseph issued a directive to Lyman Wight to find a
place of refuge for the saints in the territory of Texas. After Joseph's
death, Lyman Wight and Brigham Young didn't necessarily see eye to eye
in some ways and they had a falling out resulting in Lyman Wight's
excommunication in 1848.

Lyman Wight's sprout of Mormonism came to be known colloquially as the
Whitites and they built the first temple to be constructed post-Nauvoo
in Zodiac, Texas, where they practiced sealings, ordinations, washing
and anointings, and celestial adoptions. The Whiteites practiced
polygamy and Lyman Wight himself had three wives, Jane Margaret
Ballantyne, Mary Hawley, and Mary Ann Hobart. For a very brief time, the
last remaining living Smith brother, William, led the Whitites in Texas,
and Lyman served as his councilor. After Lyman Wight's death, the
Whitites were largely absorbed by the Reorganization and led by Joseph's
son, Joseph III.

CUTLERITE

Another small sprout to discuss is the Cutlerite movement. Alpheus
Cutler had joined the church in 1833 and stayed with Joseph Smith
through thick and thin. In Nauvoo, Cutler was inducted into the High
Council, Quorum of the Anointed, Council of Fifty and was the 6^th^
person ever to receive his second anointing, which happened a week
before Brigham Young received his. LDS records indicate that Cutler took
Luna Rockwell, Margaret Carr, Abigail Carr, Sally Cox, Disey McCall, and
Henrietta Miller as wives, sealed to him in 1846. Cutler went on to
establish Winter Quarters in Nebraska, the landing pad for Brighamite
Mormons before they began their trek across the plains to Utah. Cutler
and Brigham had a falling out and Cutler subsequently formed his own
Cutlerite church in Manti, Fremont Co., Iowa.

Two of Cutler's daughters ended up marrying Heber C. Kimball, but were
abandoned as Kimball was notoriously negligent with most of his wives.
In response to this, Cutler decided polygamy wasn't a divine command and
cut ties with his multiple wives and remained with his original wife,
Lois, until his death in 1864. The Cutlerite sprout of Mormonism remains
a church today with around a dozen adherents. The consensus among them
is largely that Alpheus Cutler and Joseph Smith never practiced polygamy
and that it was merely a later fabrication by Brigham Young. After
Cutler's death, the Cutlerites followed a revelation that they would
build the temple Joseph and Sidney Rigdon had dedicated in Jackson
County, Missouri, and the migrated the Cutlerite headquarters to
Independence. This happened while the reorganization was in progress and
the vast majority of Cutlerites fell away during the migration and
followed Joseph III into the reorganization. This sprout spawned another
breakoff faction which died and the mainstream Cutlerite sect was
essentially snuffed out by the larger RLDS church and only survives as a
withered twig sticking out of the Mormon heritage soil, led today by a
man named Vernon Whiting.

The Cutlerites, Whitites, and the Strangites comprise most of the major
sprouts descended from Joseph's Mormonism in Nauvoo. There are dozens of
other sprouts we could discuss, but we'll forego doing so at this time
in lieu of discussing the two largest branches which still exist today,
the Utah-based Brighamite LDS church and the Josephite Community of
Christ, formerly known as the RLDS.

Let's begin this part of the conversation with the public perception of
polygamy in Nauvoo prior to the departure of the Brighamite Mormons
beginning in 1846. With how publicly it's understood that Joseph Smith
practiced polygamy today, that's only come after a century of
scholarship on his life. He was able to keep free-love and polygamy so
deep underground that there were people in the trusted elite who thought
he wasn't practicing polygamy, or was even opposed to it and defended
his name. Joseph's polygamy was so tightly under wraps that his own son,
Joseph III, didn't know his dad was a polygamist, even when some of
Joseph's wives were living in the same house as the young Smith boy.

Brigham continued practicing polygamy with an air of secrecy until he
was certain the Saints wouldn't be bothered in Utah. After Joseph's
death, Brigham and Heber C. Kimball took most of Joseph's wives for
themselves, adding to their already sizeable harem, but keeping in line
with the biblical Levitical law of passing wives to brothers, albeit
brothers in the covenant.

Finally, in 1852, Brigham went full-force into public practice and
widely published in Utah periodicals the 1843 revelation from Joseph
Smith declaring polygamy a necessity for anyone to attain the Mormon
celestial heaven. From 1852 to the end of the 1800s, the Mormon elite no
longer were forced to keep polygamy a secret and it was widely
publicized that the Mormons were practicing polygamy in their Utah
stronghold. However, Brigham Young openly announcing that polygamy was
to be practiced openly, merely confirmed what most of the country knew
about Mormons already.

Vicksburg Daily Whig 1 Jan 1852

"You will not think me gifted with ubiquity when I tell you, that forty
days since I was in the City of the Salt Lake. As you have probably
learned by the papers, the Mormon leaders, and people instigated by
them, became so violent in denunciation of the United States Government
and its officers, and so determined in resistance of the law, that a
longer stay among these fanatical wretches was thought incompatible with
the dignity of Government agents, or the self-respect of loyal citizens
of the United States.

Socially and morally, the Mormons are the most degraded people on earth.
Polygamy, adultery, incest and other crimes of equal infamy, are openly
practiced and avowed. Murder stalks abroad.---Treason and sedition are
rife among the ci devant "Latter Day Saints." The valley of the Salt
Lake is a nest in which immorality, ignorance and fanaticism have so
long incubated; that treason is already half fledged. This organization
of villains and fools is already formidable in number and spirit; our
Government must look to it, else much trouble may result."

We could literally spend this entire episode reading newspaper articles
just like this, especially as the timeline progresses closer to the
civil war which would occupy people's minds more than the degraded
Mormons in Utah, but you get the idea from this single article. Most
media outlets nationwide weren't friendly to the Mormons in the Salt
Lake Valley and many other sprouts wholly unaffiliated with Brighamite
Mormons were condemned for wearing the same Mormon badge.

With wide public circulation of tabloids just like this, the broader
public who'd thought the Mormon problem was dealt with when they were
removed from Illinois began to take notice and incite legal actions
against the Utah Mormons and their repugnant practices.

One of the primary platforms of the 1856 presidential election was
outlawing the twins of barbarism, slavery and polygamy, both legal in
the Utah territory. With bipartisan support of that platform, James
Buchanan won the presidency in 1856 as a Democrat. Buchanan would
spearhead the political and military opposition to Mormon polygamy and
slavery, sending American troops to Utah in 1857-58 to instate their own
governor over Utah in place of Brigham who'd just finished his term as
governor over the territory. Brigham answered Buchanan's military force
by fortifying Parley's canyon and setting up the Nauvoo Legion in
preparation for the impending military conflict. The Mormon troops
basically guerilla terrorized the U.S. army and the army eventually gave
up and returned to the east. The Mormon war of 1857-58 came to be known
as Buchanan's blunder by the media. However, there were civilian
casualties due to the heightened tensions between Brigham's theocracy
and the U.S. government, like the Baker-Fancher party. Thought by
Brigham and other Mormon elites to be U.S. Government spies, the
Baker-Fancher party became the victims of the Mountain Meadows Massacre
in September of 1857.

Another person who took notice of the Mormons and all the political
upheaval they were causing was Justin Smith Morrill. He was born in
Vermont in 1810, not far from the Smith family, where he gained a
significant education. After a few successful business ventures, Justin
Morrill had enough money to retire from the mercantile industry and
began his political career in the Whig party in 1854. He was one of the
founders of the Republican party and ran on that platform as the Whig
party was dissolving in American politics. At the beginning of the Civil
War, Morrill still had his sights on the Mormons and was able to pass
the Morrill anti-bigamy act of 1862. The subtitle of the act is as
follows:

"An Act to punish and prevent the Practice of Polygamy in the
Territories of the United States and other Places, and disapproving and
annulling certain Acts of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of
Utah."

One of the primary reasons Brigham had chosen Utah was the fact that it
was a territory full of Native Americans that no European settlers had
ventured to colonize. Most European colonialists merely passed through
Utah on their way to California which gained statehood in 1850, but the
badlands of Utah were wholly undesirable to most frontier settlers and
the Mormons didn't fall under the jurisdiction of many US federal laws
being simply a territory, and any efforts to enforce laws were met with
apathy at best and military resistance at worst. Brigham Young may have
had some fantastical idea that if the Mormons established themselves
with their own laws in Utah, they would either not be bothered by the
U.S. government, or they could start their own Mormon country out there
and eventually establish a legally recognized theocracy and not even
have to deal with the laws established by the federal U.S. government;
Brigham was in it for the long-haul.

Let's put the Utah sprout of Mormonism on hold for a minute to go back
to Illinois and examine how well the dozens of sprouts were growing as
Joseph III was maturing to adulthood. When Joseph Smith was assassinated
in 1844, Joseph III was a mere 11 years old, hardly a practical
candidate to take the throne even though he'd been ordained and blessed
as the rightful successor by his father likely in January of 1844.

James Strang, who'd taken nearly half of the Mormons under his wing, had
begun practicing polygamy in the early 1850s and had left some
indications that he believed Joseph III would be the rightful successor
to lead the Mormons. This was a belief many of the Strangites held,
priming the movement to be reorganized with over ten thousand Mormons
vacillating on who to follow. Emma Hale Smith married major Lewis
Bidamon and had spent years sorting out the financial affairs of Nauvoo
throughout the early to mid-1850s while Joseph III was maturing into
early adulthood. Once James Strang was assassinated in 1856, it left
thousands of Mormons without a rightful successor as Strang failed to
name a rightful heir to the throne he'd constructed. Joseph III was the
only logical heir to take the Mormon throne his father had originally
established from 1830-44.

Joseph III stepped up to the plate in April of 1860 and finally assumed
his status at the head of the Mormon Aristocracy, harvesting dozens of
disparate sprouts of Mormonism and annexing them into the Reorganized
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the RLDS, not to be
confused with the FLDS which didn't yet exist.

Beginning in January 1860, the soon to be designated RLDS church
published the True Latter Day Saints Herald, their own proprietary
publication which is still published to this day. A small extract from
the foreword discusses the purposes behind publishing the periodical:

"That a Church Paper is very much needed it requires no argument to
prove. We want it, that through it, the great work of these Latter Days
may be presented to the world of mankind in its true light-that the
Saints who are in transgression may be shown their sins, and likewise
their duty to God-that those who are deceived by false teachers, and
have "given heed to SEDUCING spirits and doctrines of devils," may be
redeemed from their errors, and taught the "\'way of life everlasting.""

The editors were three men who were considered trusted individuals of
Joseph Smith's elite who were viciously opposed to polygamy. The very
first article after the foreword of the article dealt with polygamy and
reads as such, titled "Polygamy contrary to the revelations of God":

"A MORE delusive idea never entered into the heart of man than the
belief that polygamy is one of the doctrines of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter Day Saints. It is a favorite doctrine of the Salt Lake
Church, because that Church has "turned the grace of our God into
lasciviousness," and plunged themselves into this iniquity in direct
opposition to the plain and positive commandments of the lord our God,
as they are recorded in the Book of Mormon, in the Book of Doctrine and
Covenants, and in the Old and New Testament."

Anti-Polygamy was a central focus of the RLDS. It's worth noting that
this publication was created in the wake of the Utah war of 1857-8, when
the RLDS factions were doing everything possible to divorce themselves
from the Brighamite church so the government and public wouldn't loop
them all together as the same religion, regardless of their shared
roots. Polygamy was under harsh scrutiny as Joseph III was coming of age
to form the reorganization as their new prophet and the other factions
of Mormonism were sick and tired of being looped in with those fanatics
out in Utah. Finally, in May of 1860, the True Latter Day Saints Herald
published their announcement of Joseph III's rising to the mantle of
prophet on April 6, 1860, the excitement in their tone is palpable.

"We devote considerable space to the proceedings of this body, believing
that they are of great importance to us, even as a nation. There is a
great body of these people scattered through the States, who, unwilling
to follow the fortunes and doctrines of Brigham Young, have been quietly
waiting for the time to come when they could organize under a lineal
descendant of Joseph Smith, as their prophet. That time has at length
arrived. Joseph Smith, Jr., occupies the position which his father once
held. A new era in the history of Mormonism has dawned---an era which we
hope will greatly improve the name of this despised people.

Whatever ideas we may entertain in relation to the doctrines of the
Mormons, we must look with approbation and satisfaction upon any
movement on their part which looks towards a radical reformation in
their practices as a people.

For many years past Brigham Young has been looked upon as the embodiment
of Mormonism, and those professing to be Mormons have been regarded as
no better than he. Henceforth, they, or at least one branch of them, are
to be judged by a different standard. The eyes of the world will now be
turned upon young Joseph. Hitherto this man has borne a good name.---His
talents are of no mean order; and it is earnestly to be hoped that he
will use them for good and not a bad purpose."

Begin Joseph III's inauguration speech:

"It is claimed that the great body of the Mormon people are scattered
through the several States, and that a prophet, by lineage, will call
together the scattered fragments and unite them into a grand whole."

"I would say to you, brethren, (as I hope you may be and in faith I
trust you are,) as a people that God has promised his blessings upon, I
came not here of myself, but by the influence of the Spirit. For some
time past I have received manifestations pointing to the position which
I am about to assume.

I wish to say that I have come up here not to be dictated by any men or
set of men. I have come in obedience to a power not my own, and shall be
dictated by the power that sent me.

God works by means best known to himself, and I feel that for some time
past He has been pointing out a work for me to do...

I have endeavored as far as possible, to keep myself unbiased. I have
never conversed with J. J. Strang, for in those days I was but a boy,
and in fact am now but a boy. I had not acquired a sufficient knowledge
of men to be capable of leading myself, setting aside the leading of
others.

There is but one principle taught by the leaders of any faction of this
people that I hold in utter abhorrence. That is the principle taught by
Brigham Young and those believing in him. I have been told that my
father taught such doctrines. I have never believed it and never can
believe it. If such things were done, then I believe they never were
done by Divine authority. I believe my father was a good man, and a good
man never could have promulgated such doctrines...

A gentleman from Utah informs me that a majority of Brigham Young's
people were restive---not satisfied with their condition---but dared say
nothing. That those who preached and those who practiced his teachings
were, in reality, the old fogies of the institution, the younger taking
a different view of matters."

And thus, the divine Smith lineage was once again embodied in the son of
Joseph the prophet, Joseph III, and he was emplaced upon the vacant
Mormon throne his father had left behind. The RLDS church was officially
declared and lead by Joseph III from this time forward, in fierce
opposition to the Utah Brighamite Mormonism. As stated by Joseph III
himself, he couldn't believe, nor never could, that his father practiced
polygamy or promulgated the doctrine thereof. Joseph III subsequently
went on multiple mission trips to the western Mormons. He did this in a
bid to gain followers who wanted to be led by the familial lineage of
Joseph or who were dissatisfied with Brigham's rule for whatever
reasons. Joseph was successful in garnering some followers from these
trips, but what he gained, of much greater value, was knowledge.

During most of these trips, Joseph was attempting to get to the bottom
of his father's polygamy. In multiple interviews and letter exchanges
with prominent people in Joseph Smith's life, Joseph III came to
understand the overwhelming evidence of his father's practice of
polygamy. This truly is incredible to yours truly. Joseph III had lived
in the Nauvoo mansion with his mother and several of Joseph's plural
wives during his childhood, and even he wasn't aware that these women
were sister-wives to his mother, Emma. If we hold any skepticism about
how Joseph Smith was able to conceal his polygamy from so many people
for so many years, whatever techniques he employed must have been
incredibly effective because even his own son was unaware polygamy was
being practiced by his own father in his own home. Joseph Smith was
surprisingly effective at living 2 completely different lives.

Mormon historian Roger D. Launius does a great job dealing with Joseph
III in his article titled "Methods and Motives: Joseph Smith III's
opposition to polygamy, 1860-90". Here's a few extracts discussing
Joseph III's war on facts when it came to his father's polygamy:

"When Joseph Smith III preached his first sermon as leader of the
Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints at Amboy,
Illinois, on 6 April 1860, he expressed his unqualified aversion to the
Mormon doctrine of plural marriage:...

No issue infuriated or drew his attention as did plural marriage---and
especially charges of his father's role in its origination. Indeed,
opposition to the practice became something of a *cause celebre* for
Smith and, by extension, for the Reorganized Church during the
nineteenth century. Recent historical investigation has demonstrated
that, by the last decade of the century, the Reorganized Church as an
institution had rejected the previously well-accepted idea that Joseph
Smith, Jr., had begun the practice. During the 1970s and 1980s, however,
numerous historians, among them Reorganized Church historian Richard P.
Howard, probed deeper into the origins of plural marriage, demonstrating
beyond reasonable doubt the Mormon prophet's central role in developing
the doctrine during the Nauvoo experience and offering frameworks for
understanding it...

These compelling historical arguments raise a central question: How
could Joseph Smith III flatly deny his father's role in beginning Mormon
polygamy while confronted with substantial evidence to the contrary?
Additionally, what role did Smith play in the antipolygamy crusade of
the latter nineteenth century? These questions inform the analysis
presented in this essay.

Essentially, Joseph Smith III approached his father's involvement in
plural marriage from an already fixed viewpoint. His admission that he
could never believe his father might have been involved in polygamy
seems to have guaranteed his perspective in spite of countervailing
evidence. Smith subscribed to a postulate as immovable as a geometric
theorem: (1) Joseph Smith, Jr., had been a good man. (2) Good men do not
practice polygamy. (3) Therefore, Joseph Smith, Jr., could not have been
involved in Mormon plural marriage. All his actions and thought
processes concerning the practice rested upon this central postulate."

The cognitive dissonance in Joseph III's writings is painful. His
crusade to prove Joseph Smith never practiced polygamy came into
conflict with the facts surrounding his father. Joseph III spoke with a
number of Joseph's widows and closest acolytes who all affirmed that
Joseph did, indeed, practice polygamy, but Joseph III wanted to
exonerate his father's name and believe what his mother claimed
concerning this practice he considered repugnant and immoral. His
writings from the late 1800s show he was never able to reconcile the
cognitive dissonance, instead compartmentalizing the issue. From later
in Launius' article on Joseph III:

"On 5 March 1886, he \[Joseph III\] wrote to Zenos H. Gurley, Jr., an
apostle who was a gadfly to Smith on the question of polygamy's origins
as well as other issues, "You know that while I believe father was not
the author of Utah polygamy I have not and am not now making the battle
against the Utah church on that ground but upon the ground that plural
marriage is not of God no matter whoever the revelation, so called, came
through or who taught or practiced it". Smith also suggested that his
father had not been perfect and that if it turned out he had been
responsible for polygamy's establishment, he would be punished. He told
a J. J. Barbour of Dart Town, Georgia, on 15 May 1878, "While I fully
believe that Joseph did not receive the revelation referred to, yet, if
he did, it is so directly opposed to the laws already received, that I
must \[admit\] it to have been either of man or of the Devil."

Joseph III's opposition to Joseph Smith's polygamy would be enshrined in
RLDS scholarship and historical studies for nearly 100 years before
being acknowledged by some RLDS historians. Polygamy deniers only occupy
a very small fringe group of Mormon historians, most of whom aren't
taken very seriously among the mainstream Mormon historians.

Joseph III would continue to fight against polygamy, falling largely in
line with the U.S. government who continued to apply legal restrictions
against Utah polygamy through the remainder of the 1800s. The Morrill
anti-bigamy act had been put into place in 1862, lobbied by Justin
Morrill and signed into law by Abraham Lincoln while the civil war raged
in its infancy.

With the Morrill anti-bigamy act signed into law, a force came from
within the Utah territory in the form of a sprout run by a man named
William S. Godbe. In the very late 1860s Godbe was opposed to the
incredible amount of control Brigham had over the Utah territory and he
became increasingly opposed to polygamy. He voiced his criticisms of
Brigham Young in the Utah Magazine which would eventually become the
Salt Lake Tribune, and was subsequently excommunicated from the
Brighamite LDS church in 1869. Here we see another small sprout crop up
from the fertile Mormon soil, called the Godbeites. Godbe, and the women
who influenced him, came up with an ingenious solution to the plight of
women living under the patriarchal grip of polygamy; they finally had a
solution to end the oppressive patriarchy in Utah, they decided to give
women the right to vote. The reason I focus on William Godbe in this
little bit, as opposed to the women who lobbied with him, is because the
government was exclusively run and moved by men. Women who wanted their
voice to be heard in the realm of politics could merely exert their
desires on the men who were in office, but they didn't actually have
their own voice. We'll be focusing on the prominent women involved in
politics using men as proxies as our historical timeline progresses.

In 1870, Utah women were given the right to vote with the hopes they
would vote to outlaw polygamy. When the tally was taken, they
overwhelmingly voted to retain the right to continue practicing
polygamy, even though it violated the Morrill anti-bigamy act passed 8
years prior. Women's right to vote was eventually revoked by congress in
1887 when they realized the Mormon women wouldn't vote in favor of
abolishing polygamy. Trying to unpack why the women voted to keep
polygamy is far too complex an exercise for us to engage with today.

It became clear that giving women the right to vote wouldn't remove
polygamy so the government went back to the drawing board. A law like
the Morrill anti-bigamy act on the books is great, but it doesn't mean
anything if it can't be enforced upon the people the law attempts to
control, which was the Morrill act's greatest flaw. Utah had been
established as a theocracy by Brigham Young and he didn't plan on ceding
his stranglehold anytime soon. Every government office from the top down
was run by Mormons and they all looked to Brigham for guidance or
permission. Nothing happened in Utah without Brigham's knowledge or
consent. The Morrill anti-bigamy act specifically targeted the Mormons
in Utah, but the government authorities there refused to enforce the law
because they were all Mormons. A subsequent act was necessary to be able
to enforce Morrill's anti-bigamy act.

Another occurrence which happened in the meantime merely added fuel to
the U.S. government's fire, The Mountain Meadows Massacre. It happened
back in 1857, but still nobody had been punished for the deaths of 120
men, women, and children. The U.S. government had been a bit preoccupied
since the massacre with the civil war and reconstruction afterward so it
took a bit of time for them to react properly while at the same time
they were trying to figure out how to enforce anti-polygamy laws in the
Utah theocracy. The government wanted Utah to be accountable for their
actions. Finally, a Congressman from Vermont named Luke P. Poland took a
stand and proposed a bill known as the 1874 Poland Act.

From an article on famous-trials.com about the Poland Act of 1874

"Each Utah county had a probate court presided over by an elected judge.
No federal circuit court was ever established in Utah or with
jurisdiction over Utah. Many litigants, especially Mormons, took their
cases to the probate court rather than before the federally appointed
judge of the district court. The effect was to displace the federally
appointed courts with a system of local control. Congress reacted by
placing the judiciary firmly under federal control. The Poland Act of
1874 (18 Stat. 253) restricted the probate courts to matters of estates
and guardianship, removing all civil, chancery, and criminal
jurisdiction. It gave the district courts exclusive jurisdiction for all
suits over \$300, and it abolished the local offices of the territorial
marshal and territorial attorney."

That last line is most important when it came to enforcing laws in Utah.
It abolished local offices of territorial marshal and territorial
attorney. Those were offices held by people under Brigham's watch, and
they wouldn't do anything to offend the prophet and king of Utah. This
removed executive and enforcement power from Utah's jurisdiction and
made it a territory enforced by U.S. government marshal and attorney.
From the same article:

"Prosecution for the murders at Mountain Meadows became possible only
when, in 1874, Congress passed the Poland Act. The Act sought to
eliminate the nearly total control the Mormon Church had over Utah\'s
justice system. The Poland Act redefined the jurisdiction of Utah
courts, restricting the formerly powerful probate courts, which had
taken no action concerning the 1857 massacre, to their traditional
jurisdiction. The Act also eliminated the territorial marshal and
attorney, giving their duties to a U. S. marshal and U. S. attorney.
Finally, the Act opened up Utah juries to non-Mormons.\
The first grand jury called under the new law, in September 1874,
indicted Lee, Dame, Haight, Higbee, Klingensmith, Stewart, and three
other men for the deaths of members of the Fancher Party at Mountain
Meadows in 1857."

These 9 men were indicted for the Mountain Meadows Massacre and John D.
Lee was summarily executed in 1877 for his involvement, the only person
who suffered any legal repercussions for the intentional deaths of 120
people. This Poland act successfully removed prosecutorial discretion
from Utah territory and made it an operation of the federal government.
Suddenly federal laws were much easier to enforce in the Utah territory.
Polygamy was now, not only illegal, but, enforceable by the U.S.
government. This drove a number of polygamy practitioners underground or
into satellite locations like Canada and Mexico. However, the passage of
the Poland act in conjunction with the Morrill anti-bigamy act didn't
suddenly force the Utah territory into a progressive society and
immediately remove the practice of polygamy. Polygamy was a divine tenet
of Mormonism and people were willing to go to extreme lengths to
continue practicing it. Men moved their wives around to different
locations and wouldn't be seen in public with any of their wives. Most
of the documentation of these marriages was in church control, it's not
like there were government issued marriage licenses for these polygamist
relationships, so even if Heber Kimball was walking the streets with 7
of his wives, the U.S. government didn't have access to any
documentation to prove they were, indeed, his wives. How do you enforce
a law when the people who would be prosecuted under it leave no legal
paper trail and just disappear underground as soon as you try to enforce
it? This was the constant interplay battle between the U.S. government
and the Mormon elite throughout the last half of the 1800s. Mormons ran
and oversaw everything that happened in the territory and they didn't
appreciate the ever-growing power of the U.S. government absorbing their
power.

James A. Garfield was notoriously opposed to polygamy. It was seen as
the last surviving relic of the twins of barbarism. In Garfield's
inaugural address delivered 4 March 1881, we find this little gem:

"The Constitution guarantees absolute religious freedom. Congress is
prohibited from making any law respecting an establishment of religion
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. The Territories of the United
States are subject to the direct legislative authority of Congress, and
hence the General Government is responsible for any violation of the
Constitution in any of them. It is therefore a reproach to the
Government that in the most populous of the Territories the
constitutional guaranty is not enjoyed by the people and the authority
of Congress is set at naught. The Mormon Church not only offends the
moral sense of manhood by sanctioning polygamy, but prevents the
administration of justice through ordinary instrumentalities of law.

In my judgment it is the duty of Congress, while respecting to the
uttermost the conscientious convictions and religious scruples of every
citizen, to prohibit within its jurisdiction all criminal practices,
especially of that class which destroy the family relations and endanger
social order. Nor can any ecclesiastical organization be safely
permitted to usurp in the smallest degree the functions and powers of
the National Government."

Garfield wanted to be able to enforce government laws on the Utah
territory and was opposed to the practice of polygamy, even though he
was a champion of free exercise of religion. Garfield was subsequently
assassinated by Charles Guiteau a mere 4 months into his presidency. The
widely-accepted justification for the assassination was due to Guiteau's
disappointment that Garfield wouldn't give him the office of Consulship
at Paris, which he thought Garfield owed him due to his lobbying and
campaigning efforts. I'll only add this into the mix for fun, Guiteau
was also a member of the free-love Oneida group and wore the nickname of
Gitout as he was found to be repulsive by many of the women in the
society. I don't think Garfield's hard stance against polygamy had
anything to do with Guiteau assassinating him, but it is one interesting
detail to throw into the mix. Garfield's VP, Chester A. Arthur, took the
office of President after Garfield's belabored and gruesome death.
Arthur wasn't as hardline against polygamy as his predecessor or his
successor, Grover Cleveland, and for a very brief stint the Mormons
could rest easy before things became really hard.

However, the ever-growing anti-polygamy movement didn't need the
president in order for it to proliferate. In 1882 another Vermont
government official, this time a senator named George F. Edmunds who
would eventually deliver the fatal blow to polygamy, was able to pass
the Edmunds Anti-Polygamy act of 1882. Where this act differed from the
Morrill act of 1862 was three-fold. First, this Edmunds act made it a
felony at the federal level to practice polygamy. Second, it included
cohabitation as a marker for determining polygamous relationships.
Third, no man practicing polygamy could hold any public office. Now, if
any man was seen entering a home where women were living who weren't his
wife, not only could they not hold a government job, but they could be
swept up in this draconian measure of anti-cohabitation. This forced
then prophet, John Taylor, into hiding, as Brigham Young had passed away
5 years earlier in 1877.

The Edmunds act only added more artillery to the arsenal of law
enforcement against polygamy, and suddenly Mormon polygamist men were
arrested and imprisoned in droves. The arrest of polygamist men had a
few devastating impacts, mostly on the families of the people left
behind. One man supporting multiple families already stretches resources
pretty thin, but take him out of the equation and completely remove
those resources, the resulting humanitarian crisis quickly became a PR
nightmare for the U.S. government.

The political climate surrounding polygamy and its abolition was in a
weird limbo at this point. The 1^st^ amendment was a solid argument
Mormons could make as the anti-polygamy laws were directly crafted to
infringe on their religious practices that the Government didn't approve
of. The way the government was able to get around this was by making the
argument that people could believe in a religion that held polygamy as
one of its tenets, but like slavery with the old testament, they
couldn't legally practice the belief without infringing on the rights of
other people. The laws were also crafted to punish those practicing
polygamy, instead of punishing the religion which taught polygamy. This
was a bottom-up approach, but it left a lot of families without a
provider, whereas if they were to attack the religion itself with a
top-down legal approach to eradicating polygamy, it may mitigate the
damage done to already poverty-stricken families in Utah.

In reaction to the public perception of the prosecution of polygamists,
Grover Cleveland's annual address in December 1885 in the first year of
his first term as president included a few excerpts about polygamy in
Utah. He sought to address the difficulty in prosecuting polygamy when
no legal or census records faithfully recorded polygamist marriages, but
he also gave a bit of a heart-sell about the damage to the nuclear
family that polygamy creates.

"The Utah commissioners express the opinion, based upon such information
as they are able to obtain, that but few polygamous marriages have taken
place in the Territory during the last year. They further report that
while there cannot be found upon the registration lists of voters the
name of a man actually guilty of polygamy, and while none of that class
are holding office, yet at the last election in the Territory all the
officers elected, except in one county, were men who, though not
actually living in the practice of polygamy, subscribe to the doctrine
of polygamous marriages as a divine revelation and a law unto all higher
and more binding upon the conscience than any human law, local or
national. Thus is the strange spectacle presented of a community
protected by a republican form of government, to which they owe
allegiance, sustaining by their suffrages a principle and a belief which
set at naught that obligation of absolute obedience to the law of the
land which lies at the foundation of republican institutions.

The strength, the perpetuity, and the destiny of the nation rest upon
our homes, established by the law of God, guarded by parental care,
regulated by parental authority, and sanctified by parental love.

These are not the homes of polygamy.\
The mothers of our land, who rule the nation as they mold the characters
and guide the actions of their sons, live according to God\' s holy
ordinances, and each, secure and happy in the exclusive love of the
father of her children, sheds the warm light of true womanhood,
unperverted and unpolluted, upon all within her pure and wholesome
family circle.

These are not the cheerless, crushed, and unwomanly mothers of
polygamy.\
The fathers of our families are the best citizens of the Republic. Wife
and children are the sources of patriotism, and conjugal and parental
affection beget devotion to the country. The man who, undefiled with
plural marriage, is surrounded in his single home with his wife and
children has a stake in the country which inspires him with respect for
its laws and courage for its defense.

These are not the fathers of polygamous families.\
There is no feature of this practice or the system which sanctions it
which is not opposed to all that is of value in our institutions.

There should be no relaxation in the firm but just execution of the law
now in operation, and I should be glad to approve such further discreet
legislation as will rid the country of this blot upon its fair fame.

Since the people upholding polygamy in our Territories are reenforced by
immigration from other lands, I recommend that a law be passed to
prevent the importation of Mormons into the country."

With Grover Cleveland so harshly against polygamy, new legislation could
be approved which finally attacked polygamy from the top down, instead
of just punishing those who practice. George Edmunds took this new
possible approach into consideration to try and plug the holes left by
his 1882 Edmunds anti-polygamy act. Edmunds and a Virginia congressman
named John Randolph Tucker teamed up to write the Edmunds-Tucker act of
1887 which directly targeted the Mormon religion and those who practiced
polygamy at a systematic level and imposed the annexation of any church
property over \$50,000 to be absorbed as property of the government
until the Mormons complied. It also disincorporated the Mormon church as
an entity and defunded the perpetual immigration fund. The
Edmunds-Tucker act of 1887 hit the Mormon church where it hurt. The
passage of this law coincided with the death of the third prophet, John
Taylor. Taylor had fallen ill to congestive heart failure and was unable
to execute his duties as prophet. The duties of prophet fell to the
Quorum of the Twelve with Wilford Woodruff as president until 1889 when
he was finally called and sustained as the president of the church.

This was a trying time for Mormons in Utah. Wilford Woodruff was
particularly millennialist in his sermons, frequently preaching that the
end is nigh at hand. His apocalyptic revelations waxed intensity as he
progressed into his later life. Many Mormons saw the government's hard
stance against polygamy as the final sign that the end times were
actively happening. This lapse of two years from 87-89 when Woodruff
took the mantle as prophet may be explained by the Mormons not
concerning themselves with the government because they knew Jesus was on
his way any time now and he would rule over the new Jerusalem the
Mormons had built in Utah, burning away all the sinners from the world.
The Edmunds-Tucker act would put the pressure on the Mormons to snap
them into reality and force Wilford Woodruff's hand as acting president
of the church.

"The act disincorporated both the LDS Church and the [Perpetual
Emigration
Fund](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perpetual_Emigration_Fund) on the
grounds that they
fostered [polygamy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygamy). The act
prohibited the practice of polygamy and punished it with a fine of from
\$500 to \$800 and imprisonment of up to five years. It dissolved
the [corporation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incorporation_(business)) of
the church and directed the confiscation by the federal government of
all church properties valued over a limit of \$50,000. The act was
enforced by the [U.S.
Marshal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Marshals_Service) and
a host of deputies.

The act:

-   Disincorporated the LDS Church and the Perpetual Emigrating Fund
    > Company, with assets to be used for public schools in the
    > Territory.[\[6\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmunds%E2%80%93Tucker_Act#cite_note-6)

-   Required an anti-polygamy oath for prospective voters, jurors and
    > public officials.

-   Annulled territorial laws allowing illegitimate children to inherit.

-   Required civil [marriage
    > licenses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage_license) (to aid
    > in the prosecution of polygamy).

-   Abrogated the common law [spousal
    > privilege](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spousal_privilege) for
    > polygamists, thus requiring wives to testify against their
    > husbands.[\[7\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmunds%E2%80%93Tucker_Act#cite_note-7)

-   [Disenfranchised
    > women](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women%27s_suffrage_in_Utah) (who
    > had been enfranchised by the Territorial legislature in
    > 1870).[\[8\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmunds%E2%80%93Tucker_Act#cite_note-8)

-   Replaced local judges (including the previously powerful [Probate
    > Court](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probate_Court) judges) with
    > federally appointed judges.

-   Abolished the office of Territorial superintendent of district
    > schools, granting the supreme court of the Territory of Utah the
    > right to appoint a commissioner of schools. Also called for the
    > prohibition of the use of sectarian books and for the collection
    > of statistics of the number of
    > so-called [gentiles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentile#LDS_Church_usage) and
    > Mormons attending and teaching in the schools."

The passage of the Edmunds-Tucker anti-polygamy act was challenged by
the church and in 1890 a supreme court ruling titled "Late Corporation
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. United States"
held that the property seizures were lawful and not an infringement on
the free exercise of religion.

With no options left and Jesus not miraculously appearing to defend
polygamy, Wilford Woodruff, 1.5 years into his presidency, utterly
defeated by the puritanical U.S. Government, approached the October 1890
conference with the infamous manifesto in hand.

(Crowd sound fx and echo voice)

"To Whom It May Concern:

Press dispatches having been sent for political purposes, from Salt Lake
City, which have been widely published, to the effect that the Utah
Commission, in their recent report to the Secretary of the Interior,
allege that plural marriages have been contracted in Utah since last
June or during the past year, also that in public discourses the leaders
of the Church have taught, encouraged and urged the continuance of the
practice of polygamy---

I, therefore, as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, do hereby, in the most solemn manner, declare that these charges
are false. We are not teaching polygamy or plural marriage, nor
permitting any person to enter into its practice, and I deny that either
forty or any other number of plural marriages have during that period
been solemnized in our Temples or in any other place in the Territory.

One case has been reported, in which the parties allege that the
marriage was performed in the [Endowment
House](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endowment_House), in Salt Lake
City, in the Spring of 1889, but I have not been able to learn who
performed the ceremony; whatever was done in this matter was without my
knowledge. In consequence of this alleged occurrence the Endowment House
was, by my instructions, taken down without delay.

Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural
marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court
of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws,
to use my influence with the members of the Church over which I preside
to have them do likewise.

There is nothing in my teachings to the Church or in those of my
associates, during the time specified, which can be reasonably construed
to inculcate or encourage polygamy; and when any Elder of the Church has
used language which appeared to convey such teaching, he has been
promptly reproved. And I now publicly declare that my advice to the
Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden
by the law of the land.

Wilford Woodruff \[signed\]

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

And that's where we'll leave things until next week. Of all the various
iterations of Mormonism we've examined today, they all sprouted from
this central point of fertile religious soil in Nauvoo and they all have
the same roots. Some of these sprouts hated polygamy and denied the
founding prophet ever practiced it, others held to the practice as the
only way to achieve eternal salvation.

One thing I've personally gained from studying this so much the past
month or so is a major appreciation and sense of empathy for what these
people went through. Each group of Mormons were only doing what they
viewed as right in God's eyes, and that required them to live by the
words of mere men who were invested mostly in their own self interests.
The government knew that polygamy was illegal and their jurisdiction
covered the Utah territory, but they were only trying to perpetuate the
status quo of puritanical monogamy, and there's nothing saying that's
the perfect form of marriage or family structure. People went into
hiding for years to protect what they considered moral. People went to
prison for following god's will. Mormons killed and died for polygamy.
The government killed and sustained losses to limit polygamy. The
government directly violated the free exercise of religion to halt
polygamy and it wouldn't be until 1978 that the Edmunds-Tucker act was
repealed. The government annexed Mormon property to stop polygamy. The
government forced already impoverished people into ever-deeper cycles of
poverty amidst their war on polygamy.

This isn't a simple comic book story with clear lines of good guys and
bad guys. These were real people. These people were trying to do what
they thought was right. The people at the highest levels in government
and the Mormon church suffered the least, those who suffered the most
were the small families with very little power in the church to change
their status, and they were arrested or exiled from Utah to seek a land
of refuge which wouldn't infringe on their religious freedom. Nobody was
right, and everybody was just a little bit wrong in different ways.

Remember this whenever considering any issue. People think they're on
the right side, everybody is the protagonist of their own story, and
everybody's religion is the one true religion.

Podcastathon

Mark and Dan 11th

Next week we'll focus on the real people who suffered through polygamy,
the women. I'm hoping to bring on an expert guest to help us navigate
20^th^ century polygamy and give us some insight into the women's plight
surrounding the practice of polygamy.
