---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 57 - Sign of the Times and Spiritual Tokens
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-57-sign-times-spiritual-tokens/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-57-sign-of-the-times-and-spiritual-tokens
category: History
date: 2017-07-06 21:23:57 PDT
---

Ep 57 – Sign of the Times and Spiritual Tokens

On this episode, we cover July to November of 1839. We start with a
discussion about how scarce documentation is for this blackout period of
Mormon history and what that means for historiographies which cover this
time period. After that, Jo tells us how we can tell if a spirit is from
God or the devil, which hearkens back to his magic roots. After that we
take an extract from Bloody Brigham Young’s manuscript history to follow
the travel of the Twelve as they made their way closer to boarding a
ship for England. After the history, we debut an exciting new segment to
leak off the church and then we get into some of the church’s new face
of homophobia and discuss just how new their stance on the LGBTQ
community really is…. Spoiler alert, the church is still led by a bunch
of red-scare bigoted octogenarians who are on the wrong side of history.

Links:

Autobiography of Benjamin F. Johnson  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/BFJohnson.html>

Lance Owens Joseph Smith and the Kabbalah  
<http://gnosis.org/jskabb3.htm>

Rosicrucianism in America  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosicrucianism>

Ephrata Cloister and the Whitmers  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephrata_Cloister>

Hermeticism  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermeticism>

Manuscript history of Brigham Young  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/MSHBY.html>

Savannah’s testimony  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_0nhyP6dU4>

Mormon and Gay  
<https://mormonandgay.lds.org/articles/church-teachings>

Face 2 Face with Jeffrey R. Holland  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZwIULpPZhcQ>

Ryan McKnight and Mormon Leaks  
<https://mormonleaks.io/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Intro 7/6/17

Before we get started, it’s our patreon pledge month leading up to the
live show at Squatter’s pub in Salt Lake City on July 29<sup>th</sup>.
We’ve had an influx of support from some of you amazing listeners who’ve
taken the 90 seconds to sign up at patreon.com/nakedmormonism, and we
really appreciate it. For as little as a dollar an episode, less than
the price of a 110 degree soy latte at your favorite coffee outlet, you
can contribute that pocket-change every month to keep the research going
and keeping us in a state of constant R\&D to make the show better every
week. Asking for money is a bit of a social taboo, but the social
benefits derived from funding research is a long-term investment and
that’s what you do when supporting this show. But we aren’t just asking
for some of your hard-earned cash in exchange for an intangible claim
that you’re funding research, because patrons of the show get access to
tons of exclusive content. You get bang for that buck per episode. When
you sign up at patreon.com/nakedmormonism, you get access to extended
edition episodes, patreon exclusive shows, extended conversations with
guests, and you even get an invite to join in the NaMo home evening
monthly google hangout on the first Monday of every month; each month
has a featured guest who we all get to bombard with our questions. This
week you’ll notice an extra episode in your podcast feed, which was
June’s NaMo home evening we had with friend of the show Heretic Woman
of the Atheists on Air podcast. All of the NaMo home evenings go up in
the patreon feed, but this is a teaser to show everybody what you’re
missing out on. And of course, patrons will also see this months NaMo
home evening in their patreon feed which was with friend of the show
Jonathan Tindell of the Secular Stories podcast. Next month we hope to
have on Marissa McCool author and host of Inciting Incident and a
thousand other projects, so if you want to join in the conversation or
listen to what we talk about after it airs, now’s the time to pledge to
support and gain access to our book of exaltation to be forever
immortalized as a savior of the show.

That’s enough begging, let’s get to the show.

Last episode we discussed, at length, a development in Mormon doctrine;
but how we got there was just as interesting as the doctrinal
development or evolution itself. The quorum of the Twelve were set to
depart for their mission to England throughout the remainder of the
summer, but they needed instructions from Jo before they could be
trusted out there to convert people to Jo’s Mormonism instead of their
own proprietary version. Jo had been burned by trusted leaders going off
and starting their own Mormonism before and didn’t want it happening
with the quorum in Europe. In the discourse we read from the History of
the Church, Jo talked about a number of important issues like baptism,
repentance, the gift of the holy ghost, the comforter and the other
comforter, making your calling and election sure, and of course, the
gift of tongues. Astute listener and friend of the show who I owe a
great deal of personal thanks to, Jay Mumford, sent an email in response
to the Mormon version of the gift of tongues.

I related a few stories I’ve heard of Mormons getting the gift of
tongues when they give a blessing in a different language which sounds
just like somebody else or has any kind of miraculous nature to it. I
gave my naturalistic musings on easy explanations for these perceived
phenomena, but Jay said something interesting in response to that
digression.

“Re missionaries having uncanny linguistic abilities, and the first
requirement of the skeptical observer is to establish that the
extraordinary event actually did even occur in the first place.  
Now, that could be difficult due to self-motivated comments by the
original reporter, the fallibility of human memory, and the concept of
the reporter feeling justified in "lying for Jesus". But the first step
should always be to posit that we don't really know if that supposed
event even occurred. And if it did not occur, then there is no need to
explain it.”

Really fair point and I totally agree, but I would just say when people
feel like they know something happened, they aren’t always okay with
somebody saying it didn’t happen because we don’t have evidence of it.
The people might respond better to a naturalistic explanation that
validates their own perceptions but adds a reasonable explanation.
Regardless, I’m glad Jay sent this in because I hadn’t considered that
perspective. He also said that the Pentecostal version of babbling in
tongues is known as Glossolalia. I didn’t know there was an actual word
for it beyond babbling, so thanks for the enlightenment, and thank you
for your gift because as we speak, the book Moroni and the Swastika is
on its way and I’m stoked to consume the information in it.

Back to the milk, before we discussed Jo’s discourse in the last
episode, we talked all about how busy Jo was in moving around the area
to visit friends, family members, and other ailing refugees, while
seeing some of the tracts of land he had already purchased sight-unseen.
The Mormons founded a town which Jo designated Zarahemla.

After all that, we debuted a new segment as part of our Patreon pledge
drive as a teaser for the next goal on patreon, which we’re really close
to reaching. It can be hard to talk to missionaries, friends, or family
members who hold deeply convicted beliefs in the church, these segments
will be devoted to small topics of conversation that anybody can easily
broach with that TBM loved one.

We’ve had our fill of milk, let’s bring some meat to the table.

Mormon history in this show up to this point has been chronologically
driven. It’s what we do on this show, compile church history from
multiple trusted sources and tell the story of Jo and the Saints as
they’ve progressed. Most of the history recounted by trusted
historians spawn from documents included in the history of the church
supported by other journals, letters, and newspaper clippings. Chasing
these documents down is a full-time task and requires a lot of pointed
searching to find what we’re looking for. The point I’m trying to make
here is that we’ve had to shift things a little bit for the year of 1839
to talking about doctrinal developments in addition to the historical
timeline because the extant documents telling the day-to-day dealings of
the Saints are much scarcer during this time. This shouldn’t come as a
surprise. Consider everything that was going on with Jo and friends from
Liberty Jail in November of 1838 to where we currently reside in summer
of 1839. We won’t rehash everything, but suffice it to say, everything
was chaos and the structure which had existed in Kirtland, and even
Missouri, was completely absent.

Where the leadership used to meet in designated meeting rooms on the
Johnson farm, Morley farm, School of the prophets, Kirtland Temple, or
at the meeting houses in Far West or Diahmon, those organizational
concepts had utterly vanished once Jo was taken prisoner and the saints
were driven from Missouri. This meant that the structured meetings with
scribes taking minutes and notes on the proceedings simply didn’t
happen. The Mormons were incessant record keepers but at a time when all
church structure was completely broken, much of the record keeping was
conducted long after the actual meetings happened, or meetings would
happen without anybody there to possibly record things in the first
place. Many of the types of documents historians enjoy from the Kirtland
and Missouri years of the church were never even created during the
first year and a half the church was headquartered in Nauvoo. Add in to
this the fact that once the saints were driven from Nauvoo after Jo’s
death, many documents from this time period were destroyed or didn’t
make the trip across the plains to Utah to be included in the later
publications of the history of the church. Historians can’t discuss
history of a time period if documents from that period didn’t survive,
or simply weren’t created in the first place. You read any
historiography of Mormonism during 1839 and early 1840, and you’ll see a
hole in the documents during this period.

We know the major events which occurred, but for most of the meetings we
don’t know what was discussed and historians are left to piece the
timeline together based only on letter exchanges with very little other
documentation to back up a solid timeline. On this show we’ve been
dealing with this blackout period of Mormon history by discussing the
evolution of Mormon doctrine and spending inordinate amounts of time
discussing the land-purchase agreements as the Mormons were settling,
that’s because there really isn’t much else that’s reliably documented
to discuss.

One of the sources I’ve always relied upon heavily is H. Michael
Marquardt’s Rise of Mormonism, and he deals with this blackout by
jumping from the November court of inquiry, almost immediately to the
mission trip of the Quorum of the Twelve in September of the following
year, punctuated only by a small chapter on the development of Church
doctrine and theology as Jo was recounting it for the published History
of the Church.

There’s just not much documentation upon which to rely for this blackout
period. We can look at the history recounted through autobiographies of
this time, but actual church meetings and the minutes which were usually
recounted during the meetings are nowhere to be found. There really is
only a couple of big events to hit on before we wrap up 1839 in the next
couple of episodes. 1840 is a big year, but for the remainder of 1839,
we can’t track Jo very well.

But, just because Jo and friends are a bit hard to track in their daily
movements doesn’t mean there isn’t much to talk about for the rest of
1839. As the church moved to new locations, it required development and
evolution to adapt. Tracking from the earliest days of Mormonism in New
York, the version of Gold-Bible Mormonism the few families embraced in
living room sized congregations differs wildly in many ways from the
version of Mormonism practiced in Kirtland. As Jo moved to a new area he
had to incorporate the beliefs of the locals into his own church so as
not to remove people from their comfort zone.

A similar evolution occurred when the Saints moved from Kirtland to
Missouri. Far West and Diahman are where we begin to see a number of
evolutions about Mormon eschatology. The idea of Adam being the temporal
incarnation of the archangel Michael and being the first priesthood
holder who transferred the priesthood down to his progenitors makes its
first appearance. It wasn’t until 1838 when in Missouri that Jo claimed
that the Garden of Eden was in Missouri and Adam Ondi Ahman was the
place where Adam and Eve were banished to after the fall.

To illustrate this evolution when the Saints began settling Missouri
from Kirtland in 1838, let’s read a really quick excerpt from Benjamin
F. Johnson’s autobiography. You’ll find a link to it in the show notes.

“On our arrival at Diahman, our camp was pitched upon the town plat
which had just been surveyed by direction of the Prophet, and of course
each one was anxious to obtain the most eligible, or first choice of
lots. As I was young and unmarried my choice would come near the last
under the rule of "oldest served first." So when it was my choice I
found I must take the top lot on the promontory overlooking the Grand
River valley, or go farther away and lower down than I wished to. So I
chose the upper, which at first appeared rocky, but which made the other
lots appear almost enviable. When, after a few days, the Prophet
accompanied us to this spot, and pointed out those rocks as the ones of
which Adam built an altar and offered sacrifice upon this spot, where he
stood and blessed the multitude of his children, when they called him
Michael, and where he will again sit as the Ancient of Days, then I was
not envious of anyone's choice for a city lot in Adam-ondi-Ahman.”

This was the first time Jo had focused on anything north of Independence
in a theological sense and it only came when he was wandering around the
area himself and pointing out some cool rocks and telling Benjamin
Johnson here that his lot isn’t all that bad because those rocks were
actually altars used by Adam, who was actually Michael the archangel.

The thing about the move to Nauvoo is that Mormonism didn’t have to
evolve to accommodate a new population. Nauvoo was fertile ground for a
new city just as much as it was a clean slate for new theological
developments.

Let’s do what other historians have done to fill this blackout of
documentation and discuss the further evolution of Mormon doctrine which
was ramping up to a very magical level. This is where Jo invokes more
expertise from his past life of treasure-digging and staring at a rock
in his hat while tripping balls as a development in Mormon theology.

In July of 1839, Jo told of us some interesting properties concerning
spirits. He was kind enough to give us a litmus test for whether a
spirit is of God or not, a teaching which has perpetuated through
today’s doctrine. We’ll talk about the possible origins of this in a
minute, but first let’s set the battlefield by reading exactly what Jo
claimed. He was warning the apostles prior to their departure for
England that many of his trusted church members had left him for the
road to apostasy and begins by warning them that they better not do that
same shit while they’re in England or he’s gunna be really angry.

I’m reading this from the Dan Vogel edition of the History of the
Church, vol. 3 beginning on page 351:

“I will give you one of the Keys to the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is
an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity:--That
man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church,
saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then
know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he
does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as
correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying, that he who seeketh a
sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal,
undeviating, and firm as the pillars of Heaven; for whenever you see a
man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous
man.

About this time, in reply to many inquiries, I gave an explanation of
the Priesthood, and many principles connected therewith, of which the
following is a brief synopsis:--

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the first
Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He
obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Gen.
1:26,28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is
Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. Then to Noah, who is
Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was
called of God to this office, and was the Father of all living in his
day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on
Earth, and then in Heaven…”

Then we get into the Mormon version of creationism which is only
slightly varied from general Christianity:

“The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and
will exist to eternity.—Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth,
water, \&c., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity.
Our Savior speaks of children and says, their angels always stand before
my Father. The Father called all spirits before him at the creation of
man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to
multiply…”

And now we get to why Mormons have such a hard time changing anything
when it comes to the Priesthood, like giving it to black people or women
people.

“The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the
Keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount when they were transfigured
before him. The Priesthood is everlasting—without beginning of days or
end of years; without father, mother, \&c. If there is no change of
ordinances, there is no change of Priesthood.—Wherever the ordinances of
the gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood…”

This is when it gets to the important part that has held true throughout
the church even today. The reason I’m pointing this out and we’re
spending a fair amount of time on it is because many of Jo’s teachings
have been altered, modified, or altogether forgotten since his time as
prophet. Jo was an ideas guy, but Brigham was a manager who operated
well inside predetermined parameters. Once Jo put together the beliefs
system, Bloody Brigham just needed to stick with what Jo taught and
everything was good. When Bloody Brigham stepped outside those
parameters, things got weird and dogmatic and the church was forced to
change after his death. The Adam-God doctrine, blacks not having the
priesthood, allowance for mixed marriages, blood atonement, and I’m sure
we’ll get into a lot more once we jump into the Utah years of the
Brighamite church, all of those doctrines he taught have since been
changed. Point is, once Jo was working with the clean slate of Nauvoo,
he could incorporate things from his previous life and call them a
development of doctrine, and they stuck around as common Mormon
teachings which believers know of or believe in today.

“We may look for angels to receive their ministration, but we are to try
the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a
mistake in regard to these things. God has so ordained that when he has
communicated, no vision is to be taken but what you see by the seeing of
the eye, or what you hear by the hearing of the ear. When you see a
vision, pray for the interpretation; if you get not this, shut it up;
there must be certainty in this matter. An open vision will manifest
that which is more important. Lying spirits are going forth in the
earth. There will be great manifestations of spirit, both false and
true.

Being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances. An
angel of God never has wings. Some will say that they have seen a
spirit; that he offered them his hand, but they did not touch it. This
is a lie. First, it is contrary to the plan of God; a spirit cannot come
but in glory; and angel has flesh and bones; (WOW\!) we see not their
glory. The devil may appear as an angel of light. Ask God to reveal it;
if it be of the devil, he will flee from you; if of God, he will
manifest himself, or make it manifest. We may come to Jesus and ask him;
he will know all about it; if he comes to a little child, he will adapt
himself to the language and capacity of a little child.”

This is the beginning of the Mormon litmus test to see if a spirit is of
God or of the devil. It doesn’t go into more detail here, but apparently
questions followed in this meeting which were recounted by Wilford
Woodruff, the 2<sup>nd</sup> prophet of the Brighamite church, in his
journal volume 1:341, and I’m reading this from page 503 of Marquardt’s
Rise of Mormonism.

“In order to detect the devel when he transforms himself nigh unto an
angel of light. When an angel of God appears unto man face to face in
personage & reaches out his hand unto the man & he takes hold of the
angels hand & feels a substance the same as one man would in Shaking
hands with another he may then know that it is an angel of God, & he
should place all Confidence in him. Such personages or angels are Saints
with there \[their\] resurrected Bodies. But if a personage appears unto
man & offers him his hand & the man takes told of it & feels nothing or
does not sens\[e\] any substance he may know it is of the devel…for when
a Saint whose body is not resurrected appears unto man in the flesh he
will not offer him his hand for this is against the law given him & in
keeping in mind these things we may detec\[t\] the devil that he
decieved us not.”

Alright, let me describe this test Jo proposed for verifying the origins
of a magic spirit, because that’s what this is, Jo’s magic world view
finding its way into Mormon doctrine. Basically if you’re in a state of
consciousness where a spirit appears in a vision, in order to find out
if it’s from God, all you have to do is ask it to shake your hand, and
the outcome will tell you the spirit’s origin. If the spirt shakes your
hand, it’s a resurrected human with flesh and bones. If it refuses to
shake your hand, it’s a spirit being from God without a resurrected
body, and it will deliver its message without attempting to touch you,
because that’s against the rules or something. But, if you try to shake
its hand and it goes for it but you don’t feel anything when trying to
shake hands, like your hand just Caspers through theirs, that’s a spirit
of the devil and you should rebuke it.

I went down a long goddamn rabbit hole trying to chase the magic origin
of this spiritual litmus test thing Jo proposed. The basic conclusion I
can give after diving down and digging my way back out, it has some
really old origins, like ancient origins, which made its way through a
bunch of iterations which all played into Jo’s magic worldview. The
teaching didn’t stop with Mormonism either. In D. Michael Quinn’s early
Mormonism and the Magic World View he recounts a similar teaching in a
book from 1856 called Transcendental Magic. This is what he quotes from
it on page 226 of his book:

“This reflected a view summarized in the 1856 Transcendental Magic:
‘What is commonly called Necromancy has nothing in common with
resurrection… The proof of this is that spirits, at least the spectres
pretended to be such, may indeed touch us occasionally, but we cannot
touch them, and this is one of the most affrighting characteristics of
these apparitions, which are at times so real in appearance that we
cannot unmoved feel the hand pass through that which seems a body and
yet make contact with nothing.’ The latter phrase about not being able
to feel the hand of ‘the spectres pretended to be such’ showed that
humans cannot feel those spirits who seek to deceive. This was the
message of Smith’s 1843 revelation.”

Yes, Necromancy, that’s the technically magical term for what Mormons do
today when they perform ordinances for dead people in the temple. It
doesn’t sound quite so sacred when you paint it with a word that’s
usually associated with grave robbers and sorcerers, but that’s the
world Mormonism was born out of, so here we are.

Jo believed in a version of the Universe that nothing can be created
from nothing and that everything is eternal. We’ve read a few inklings
into this universal view, but some of the discourses he gave in Nauvoo
prior to his death really play this out quite well. His litmus test for
spirits really is a logical conclusion that’s internally consistent, but
you have to grant a few things to get in the right frame of mind, things
which are utterly and laughably not demonstrable but things in which Jo
sincerely believed. Let me show you the edge of this rabbit hole and try
to describe it as best I can, and I’ll leave a few links in the show
notes to some reading which will make all of this seem logically
consistent.

In a Universe created by God, there’s our first non-falsifiable premise
and it doesn’t get much better from here, but just hang in there with
me. In a Universe created by God which is eternal in nature, no matter
can be created or destroyed, because just grant the secondary premise
and it becomes much easier. Inside this deistic, eternal universe, human
spirits are part of the creation, but are non-corporeal, without a body.
In order to receive a body of flesh and bone, you have to come down to
earth for your intangible spirit to get a physical body, after which you
physically die and are resurrected, where your spirit and body are
recombined and you have a perfect physical body.

Because our Universe is ruled by the progression of time, it poses three
possible states for every spirit. First, a spirit can be in spiritual
form in the premortal existence, prior to coming to earth to receive its
body, being a spirit of the Lord. This explains how a spiritual
manifestation can be from God, but refuse to shake your hand when asked,
because it’s against the will of the Lord. That spirit will deliver its
message and that’s the end.

Second, a spirit can be a resurrected being who’s come to earth and
received a body. When it appears to deliver the Lord’s message, you’ll
ask to shake its hand, and because the spirit has received its earthly
body, it’ll shake your hand like a human being, illustrating it’s a
spiritual manifestation sent by God. That spirit in corporeal form will
deliver its message and that’s the end of that interaction.

The third possibility is a spirit of the devil. Because spirits of the
devil can never come to earth to receive a corporeal body they’ll never
be able to shake your hand. So you’ll ask for the sign and token and the
spirit will kindly oblige by trying to shake your hand which will just
pass right through the spirit. That’s when you know a spirit is of the
devil and needing to be rebuked. I suppose a spirit of the devil could
just refuse to shake your hand and then you’ll think it’s just a
non-resurrected spirit of the Lord, but that breaks the rules and this
whole damn circular logic trap falls apart, so don’t ask questions.

As I said, it’s logically consistent if, and only if, you grant the
false premises and understand Jo’s magic world view. But that was just
describing the rabbit hole without you seeing the edge of it, now let’s
walk to the edge and peer down to understand a little more about the
schools of thought which contributed to Jo’s understanding of the
universe.

Throughout various iterations of early Mormonism, Jo was trying to
capture the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom. His occult practices
which were included in Mormonism descended from early systems of belief
which he cherry-picked from in order to make Mormonism unique. The
rituals which descended from ancient Egypt found later iterations in the
Eleusinian mysteries which informed Hermeticism which evolved into
Kabbalah included in the Zorah texts. With the enlightenment, what we
call occult magic today found its way into a socially acceptable pursuit
of knowledge in spiritual Alchemy. This further evolved alongside
Rosicrucianism, which language finds its way into some of Jo’s
teachings, and eventually Jo joined the Masons which were a
post-enlightenment iteration of occultism and magic, from which Jo
likely appropriated the ascendency rituals for use in his temple rituals
during the Nauvoo years. For the sake of brevity, I skipped over massive
swaths of history just hitting on the highlights of the most well-known
iterations of these groups who were in constant pursuit of divine gnosis
and pure intellect. You can find a paper written by Lance Owens in the
show notes titled Joseph Smith and the Kabbalah which actually
deconstructs this whole belief system Jo’s magic world view descended
from and his mentors throughout his lifetime who contributed some
knowledge to his world view. It may have begun with Joseph Sr., Big
Daddy Cheese, and people like Luman Walters and Samuel Lawrence, and the
Whitmers, but during early Mormonism, people like Peter Kerr, Joshua
Seixas, and later, Alexander Neibaur, all followed some version of
belief system which Jo incorporated into Mormonism as the great
synthesizer he was.

As I said, this is just the very edge of the rabbit hole I’ve walked you
to and described, dive down if you’re up to the challenge.

It should be noted that the majority of these schools of thoughts
included some form of a sacrament ritual which Jo tried to emulate from
the earliest days of Mormonism. Before the doctrine of anything that’s
practiced in the church today, with the exception of baptism, sacrament
is the earliest longest-running aspect of Mormonism. You should always
be a bit suspect when a spiritual leader feeds you some of his or her
special wine collection before having a religious experience.

The entire reason we went on this digression is to illustrate how fluid
Mormonism was in its earliest days. Jo grabbed little snippets from
everything around him and manufactured his own beliefs around the gems.
Some of those aspects of early Mormonism still remain in the Brighamite
church today. This may not seem like much of a revelation to most, but
the more I study Mormon history I see how much it has departed from its
Smithian roots, so seeing teachings that Jo taught still enshrined in
today’s Brighamite church is somewhat surprising. But, this is a theme
which will repeat the further we get into Nauvoo. Brighamite Mormonism
came from the Mormonism existing in Nauvoo, which is different in a
number of ways from Kirtland Mormonism, so those two different versions
will slowly evolve to coincide as we continue to progress through the
Nauvoo years.

Once Jo had sufficiently prepared the Quorum of the Twelve for their
departure for the England trip, throughout July to September, they
departed in waves. Here, we pick up on the Manuscript History of Brigham
Young to tell us how things went for the group. Things weren’t easy as
most of them were sickly to some degree, but they had a mission and here
is what Bloody Brigham tells us of their travels once they departed.
You’ll find a link to his manuscript history in the show notes.

“September 14, 1839-- I started from Montrose on my mission to England.
My health was so poor I was unable to go thirty rods to the river
without assistance.

After I had crossed the river I got Israel Barlow to carry me on his
horse, behind him, to Heber C. Kimball's, where I remained sick till the
18th. I left my wife sick, with a babe only ten days old, and all my
children sick and unable to wait upon each other.

\--17-- My wife crossed the river and got a boy with a wagon to bring
her up about a mile to Brother Kimball's to see me.

I remained until the 18th at Brother Kimball's, when we started, leaving
his family also sick.

Brother Charles Hubbard sent his boy across the prairie fourteen miles
to a shanty on the railroad, where Brother O. M. Duel lived. Sister Duel
helped the boy to get our trunks out of the wagon. We went into the
house feeling very much fatigued. She made us a cup of tea which very
much revived us. We tarried there one night.

In the morning Brother Duel took us in his wagon, and carried us as far
as Lima, about twelve miles. When Brother Duel left us, he gave each of
us a dollar to help us on our journey. A brother then took us into a
wagon and carried us to Father Mikesell's, near Quincy. We tarried in
Quincy a few days, and began to recover, and preached a few times. We
procured a meetinghouse close to the Congregationalists, and we began at
different hours from them; but taking a notion to disturb us, they rang
their bell furiously after we had commenced our meeting. Elder Page was
preaching and he preached so loud as to drown the bell, and thus brought
out hundreds who otherwise would not have come to meeting. We received
some little assistance from the brethren.

Lyman Wight took us into a one-horse wagon, and carried us to Brother C.
C. Rich's, at Burton, where we stayed overnight.

Next morning Brother Rich carried us to Brother Wilbur's. We tarried
overnight, and Brother Wilbur took us in a buggy and carried us to
Father James Allred's, in Pittsfield, where we remained all night; and
Father Allred carried us to the neighborhood where Brother Harlow
Redfield lived, where we preached at a small branch of the Church. Next
day the brethren carried us on to Scott County to Brother Decker's, near
Winchester.

October 1.-- Went to Lorenzo D. Young's, where we tarried and recruited.

\--4-- Brother Lorenzo carried us to Jacksonville. We stayed overnight.
A sister in the Church hired a man and buggy to carry us to Springfield,
where we were kindly received by the brethren. Here I was sick and
confined to my bed for a few days. Brother Libeus T. Coon, who was then
practicing medicine, waited upon and nursed me.

On the 11th, resumed my journey in company with Brothers H. \[Heber\] C.
Kimball, Geo. \[George\] A. Smith, Theodore Turley and Brother Kimball's
father-in-law, Mr. Murray. The brethren had exchanged horses at
Springfield, and with a little assistance from the brethren there, we
obtained a two-horse wagon. The sisters fitted me up a bed in the wagon
to ride on, as I was unable to sit up.

We travelled eight miles, and put up with Father Draper for the night.
When we went into the house, Brother George A. Smith dropped on to the
hearth a bottle containing some tonic bitters, which the brethren had
prepared for us because of our sickness. At this Father Draper was very
much astonished, and said "You are a pretty set of Apostles, to be
carrying a bottle of whiskey with you." We explained to him what it was;
this appeased his righteous soul, so that he consented to have us stay
over the night.

Next morning we pursued our journey and arrived at Terre Haute on the
17th. Brother Kimball and myself put up at Dr. Modisett's, who belonged
to the Church. The other brethren put up at Milton Stowe's, who lived in
one of the doctor's houses.

In the evening the doctor called in to see them, Brother Stowe being
very poor, and the brethren quite ill in health. The doctor expressed
great sympathy for them when he returned to his house--relating over the
poverty of Brother Stowe and the brethren's ill health, he shed many
tears, but he did not have quite sympathy enough to buy them a chicken
or give them a shilling, though he was worth some four or five hundred
thousand dollars.

In the course of the evening Brother Kimball became very ill. The doctor
said he could give him something that would help him, but the old man
was so drunk he did not know what he did do, and he gave Brother Kimball
a tablespoonful of morphine. His wife saw him pour it out, but dare not
say a word, but believed it would kill Brother Kimball. A few minutes
after he took it, he straightened up in his chair, and said he felt very
strange, and thought he would lie down; and on his making a motion to go
to bed, he fell his length upon the floor. I sprang to him, rolled him
over on his back, and put a pillow under his head, and began to inquire
what the doctor had given him. I learned he had given him morphine.
Brother Kimball soon came to, and spoke faintly and said, "Don't be
scared, for I shan't die." We got him on the bed, and I nursed him
through the night. I changed his underclothing five times, and washed
him previous to changing his clothes. I found him covered with sweat, at
first like thin honey. This gradually wore out towards morning, and he
sweat naturally. He was scarcely able to speak, so as to be understood,
through the night.

The next day Brothers George A. Smith, Theodore Turley, Reuben Hedlock
and Mr. Murray, started with the wagon and three horses for Kirtland,
Ohio--the horses had pretty well given out. We gave them what money we
had, except five dollars, and told them to take good care of the team
and make all possible speed; if they did not, we would be in Kirtland
before them.

We tarried in Terre Haute until the 22nd, when Brother A. \[Almon\] W.
Babbit and Dr. Knight came to Terre Haute to see us. Next day Dr. James
Modisett sent his son and carriage, and took us twenty miles. We went
from thence to Pleasant Garden with Brother Babbitt, and put up with
Brother Jonathan Crosby, cabinetmaker. Found a few brethren who were
well and in good spirits.

We remained there a few days preaching to the few brethren and others
who wished to hear. We learned that Brother Babbitt had been preaching
through the country with good success, and had baptized five.

We tarried till Saturday, the 26th, when Brother Babbitt took us in his
buggy and carried us twelve miles, to the house of a Brother Scott,
where we tarried overnight. The family was very glad to see us.

Next morning Brother Scott sent his little son John, and carried us
fifteen miles to Belleville. Travelled several miles in the rain. We put
up at an inn for the remainder of the day and night. I was quite ill,
and Brother Kimball sat up with the landlord and his lady, quite late,
preaching to them.

Next morning the landlord rose up early and talked to the citizens about
the travellers who had put up with him the night before, and what he had
heard them say concerning the gospel. The neighbors flocked in, had many
inquiries to make, and were very anxious we should tarry and preach in
the place. The stage came along about 10 o'clock, and we went on our way
for Kirtland.

While in Pleasant Garden we obtained some money, so that with the five
dollars we previously had, amounted to $13,50. When we got into the
stage, we did not expect to be able to ride but a short distance. We
rode as far as Indianapolis, paid our passages, and found we had
sufficient means to take our passages for Richmond, Ia. \[Iowa\] {Ohio}.

When we arrived at this place we found we had means to take us to
Dayton, to which place we proceeded and tarried over night, waiting for
another line of stages. We expected to stop here and preach until we got
means to pursue our journey. I went to my trunk to get money to pay my
bill, and found that we had sufficient to pay our passages to Columbus,
to which place we took passage in the stage and tarried overnight.

When I paid my bill I found I had sufficient to pay our passages to
Wooster. We tarried till the after part of the day, and then took
passage for Wooster. When we arrived there I went to my trunk again to
get money to pay our bill, and found sufficient to pay our passages to
Cleveland.

When we got to a little town called Strongsville, towards evening,
within about 20 miles of Cleveland, I had a strong impression to stop at
a tavern when I first came into the town, but the stage did not stop
there so we went on. We arrived at Cleveland about 11 o'clock, and took
lodgings and remained till next morning.

November 3 (Sunday)-- Brother Kimball and I attended the Episcopalian
church in the forenoon. While we were walking down the street to the
hotel, we met Mr. Murray, and learned that the brethren who left us in
Terre Haute had just arrived in Cleveland. Mr. Murray was as much
astonished to see Brother Kimball alive as though he had seen one risen
from the dead. We walked down the street with him a short distance and
met the brethren, from whom I learned they had stopped at the tavern in
Strongsville, where I wished to stop the night before. They had met with
Brother John Taylor at Dayton, where he was left a few weeks before at a
tavern, very sick, by Father Coltrin, who proceeded to Kirtland.
Brothers Taylor and Hedlock got into the stage with us early in the
afternoon, and rode as far as Willoughby. We proceeded to Kirtland, and
arrived that evening, where we found a good many friends and brethren
who were glad to see us. I had a York shilling left; and on looking over
our expenses I found we had paid out over $87,00 out of the $13,50 we
had at Pleasant Garden, which is all the money we had to pay our
passages, to my certain knowledge, to start on. We had travelled over
400 miles by stage, for which we paid from 8 to 10 cents a mile, and had
eaten three meals a day, for each of which we were charged fifty cents,
also fifty cents for our lodgings.

In company with my brother, John Young, I visited Brother and Sister
Kent, my brother-in-law and sister, and found them well and in good
faith. There was some division of sentiment among the brethren in
Kirtland, many of whom lacked the energy to move to Missouri last
season, and some lacked the disposition. Some of the brethren thought
that our sickness was owing to some great wickedness we had been guilty
of.

\--10 (Sunday)-- Brother Taylor preached in the forenoon, in the temple,
and Brother Kimball in the afternoon. We spent our time in Kirtland in
visiting the brethren and recruiting our health.”

Even while the majority of them were deathly ill, the quorum slowly made
their way across the country in small groups of 3 to 5 in each. And
finally, after nearly 3 months of travel, they made it to a solid
stopping point with lots of friends before they hopped on a boat to
Buffalo. During this same time, Jo was making his way across the
country, destined for Washington D.C. to make an appeal to Martin Van
Buren for some redress for what the Mormons suffered in Missouri. We’ll
pick up on Jo and friends on their trip to Washington D.C. next episode.

You know, I’m still struggling with this concept of Mormon history since
I found out about it. Why the hell would this chaotic time in church
history be a good time to send the quorum of the Twelve out on a
mission, especially when the majority of them were too sick to even make
the trip. That 5 dollars Bloody Brigham took with him when they left
Commerce was to get them along their way, and whatever money they could
gather from Saints along the way would be to pay the rest of their way
to Europe. I mean, we can hop on a plane today for a few hundred dollars
and we can cross an ocean in a few hours, but this was a legit mission
they departed to undertake from July to September of 1839, they wouldn’t
even get to England until April of the next year\! That’s more than half
a year of their mission devoted to just getting to England in the first
place. When they left Commerce, it was a desolate swampland, utterly
devoid of any improvement aside from the 5 houses the Mormons purchased
along with the land and the couple of shacks that some of the leadership
had thrown together to take care of the thousands of sick people. They
finally get back from this mission in July of 1841, at which time Nauvoo
was home to thousands of settled Mormons with dozens of public
buildings, hundreds of homes, and even hundreds of non-Mormon settlers
who’d flocked to the sprawling metropolis once they saw how well the
Mormons were doing on the banks of the Mississippi.

It’s still a baffling concept to me though. Most of their earliest
travels to get to Buffalo were spent confined to beds, punctuated by
blowing all their travel funds on brief carriage rides from one town to
the next because they were too weak to walk any of the distance. This
was a terrible time to send away the middle managers of the church, and
it created a power vacuum that would be filled by the next yes man who
came along. John C. Bennett would be the mayor of Nauvoo upon the
Quorum’s return. A lot of things were different in Nauvoo from summer
1839 to summer 1841. Those points merely bolster the claim that there
was no worse time in Mormon history for Jo to send the quorum away on a
mission trip, or for himself to abandon the Saints in Illinois and Iowa
to go meet with the POTUS.

It’s always a challenge to posit motives on somebody’s decision,
especially when it’s a decision made more than a century and a half ago
and Mormons can point to all the good that came out of this mission trip
and post-hoc rationalize it as a decision delivered from on high. But,
I’m not an historian and I’m happy to infer my own conclusions about
Joseph Smith’s motivations based on the model of Jo I’ve constructed in
my head.

Commerce was a huge pain in Jo’s ass. Everywhere he turned people were
asking for direction, guidance, or healing from the prophet, when he
himself was ill for considerable swaths of time throughout 1839, the
ague hit everybody. I think Jo was following the basest of human nature
and running away from his problems. He had plenty of good reasons to go
talk with the president, but I think the reptilian motivations can be
boiled down to what Jo often did in times of incredible pressure,
running away instead of truly facing his problems. It happened when his
second and third kids died, it happened at the end of Zion’s camp, and a
handful of other times, Jo ran away when the pressure was too much.

Granted, he collected the affidavits from a number of people who were
imprisoned by the state of Missouri in order to petition the President
for redress. He and Hyrum both complained that they should be
compensated $100,000 for what happened to them, money which Jo really
needed to pay for all the land he was buying up at record speeds, so
that constituted a great excuse to get out of Commerce and away from the
constant nagging of the Saints. I’m not in any way saying what he did
was wrong, he was just following his instincts and I can’t blame him for
that. I guess I’m just making the case that Jo wasn’t exactly the hero
that Mormons paint him as today. He was just a dude, doin his dude
thing. Mormons often think that Jo never wanted to found a religion but
did because it was his calling and that some of the things he got into
simply got out of hand. While I agree with the latter, I strongly
believe that Jo always wanted to have a following of people who would
look to him for wisdom and guidance, but he didn’t want to deal with all
the bullshit the job entails.

This is really a microcosm for the grand disparity that exists between
Joseph Smith the prophet and who the real Jo smith was. Unfortunately
for the church, they can’t run from Jo the way he ran from anything that
caused him problems.

Mormon Leaks Minute

We are officially debuting a new segment that I think you guys will
really enjoy. For this segment we’re going to have a recurring
correspondent to help us sift through the skeletons lurking in the
closets of that great and spacious building in temple square.

We’ve gone kind of long today, but there’s been some headlines coming
out of the Mormon newsroom that I just can’t put off any longer. A few
weeks ago a video went viral of a twelve-year-old girl named Savannah
bearing her testimony. There will be a link in the show notes to the
video, but we’ll play an brief excerpt as a jump off point for what’s
going on in Mormon headlines lately.

Because this is a video and it doesn’t necessarily translate to audio
perfectly, let me set up the scene. Testimony meeting is the open mic
meeting LDS churches have on the first Sunday of every month. This girl,
Savannah, gets up with a prepared testimony, probably because she was
understandably nervous, wearing a white button-up shirt and red tie, not
necessarily approved church attire for a temple-bound Mai Maid in the
church, and she shares with the congregation the fact that she’s gay and
she knows God made her that way on purpose. I’ll let Savannah take it
from here.

Insert Savannah

And that’s the end of the video. Did it sound like she was cut
mid-sentence? That’s because she was. The bishop literally cut her mic
to end her public coming out speech which was centered around her saying
that she knows god made her the way she is and loves her. She wasn’t up
there describing lesbian sex or calling all the children in the
congregation to turn gay, she was just saying that she’s gay and it’s
okay.

The reception of this video has been interesting to say the least. To
give a little bit of background, the video was actually taken and made
its way to YouTube a few months ago, where it made a brief appearance
and Savannah was interviewed by a couple of local news outlets, but it
didn’t actually go viral until a few weeks ago, when friend of the show
Mike Norton, who goes by the screenname NewNameNoah, posted the video to
his channel which he tweeted had received a few thousand views within
the first 4 hours of being posted and it sits just under half a million
views at the time of recording this. That’s when the exmormon subreddit
picked it up and went absolutely apeshit. The following testimony
meeting, a number of people made it a point to wear garb to church in
support of Savannah including rainbow wristbands and red ties just like
what she was wearing.

I’ll be honest, I expected the feedback of this video to fall strictly
down on either side of the believing spectrum with very few believers
supporting Savannah to bridge the gap. The comments section on the video
has around 2,000 comments and skimming the top hundred or so, people are
by in large in support of Savannah and everything she symbolizes. Don’t
get me wrong, there are plenty of comments of Mormons who’re utterly
perturbed that she would have the balls to grandstand during a testimony
meeting, but the homophobia is a Mormon version of it, not the overt
homophobia as stereotyped of the bigoted firebrand Christianities rife
with people holding up signs saying God hates fags and whatnot.

A few of the comments say she shouldn’t have done what she did because
testimony meeting isn’t the place to normalize sin, it’s where you go to
bear your testimony of God. I’m paraphrasing, but you get the point, but
isn’t that exactly what she was doing? She said that she knows God made
her gay and loves her, that’s her testimony. The most exciting thing
about reading through the comments is seeing just how many people are in
support of Savannah and what she did or are outright telling the church
to go fuck itself.

Interestingly enough, what Savannah did may not have been deemed
appropriate for testimony meeting, I won’t weigh in on that, but her
perspective and continued belief in the church is perfectly in line with
the fragile position the church takes on LGBTQ issues.

About a year ago the church launched a new initiative called
MormonAndGay.lds.org, which attempts to deal with the church’s
historically bigoted stance on the issue. This was revolutionary for
some folks, but was merely a softening of the hard homophobia they’d
espoused prior to the mid-2010s. The site has a few videos of people who
are gay and Mormon and are okay with it. But, the church does take a
hard stance that people can live in a happy, god-approved marriage with
somebody of the opposite sex, and just live with what they call same-sex
attraction. Hey guys, guess what, if somebody has feelings of same-sex
attraction, they’re probably gay or fall somewhere on the sexuality
spectrum other than sys-hetero. So the church is cool with your same-sex
attraction, as long as you never act on it. Granted, the launch of this
initiative wasn’t publicized in the church and I haven’t seen any major
updates to the site since the launch with the exception of adding a few
new videos, but here’s a quote from it which summarizes the church’s
current stance on LGBTQ issues. It’s all about loving people regardless
of how God made them.

“In an October 2009 general conference address, President Dieter F.
Uchtdorf described God’s love:  
‘God does not look on the outward appearance. I believe that He doesn’t
care one bit if we live in a castle or a cottage, if we are handsome or
homely, if we are famous or forgotten. Though we are incomplete, God
loves us completely. Though we are imperfect, He loves us perfectly.
Though we may feel lost and without compass, God’s love encompasses us
completely.  
“He loves us because He is filled with an infinite measure of holy,
pure, and indescribable love. We are important to God not because of our
résumé but because we are His children. He loves every one of us” (“[The
Love of
God](https://www.lds.org/general-conference/2009/10/the-love-of-god),”
Oct. 2009 general conference).  
God loves all of us. He loves those of different faiths and those
without any faith. He loves those who suffer. He loves the rich and poor
alike. He loves people of every race and culture, the married or single,
and those who experience same-sex attraction or identify as gay,
lesbian, or bisexual. And God expects us to follow His example.’”

Like I said, it’s a softening of the hardcore Packeresque homophobia of
punching people who are gay, but it’s not exactly acceptance. It may be
considered tolerance, but it’s far from acceptance. To drive the point
home even further, this is a clip from the last question of a Face to
Face meetup with Apostle Jeffrey R. Holland, and this video was made and
posted after the launch of MormonAndGay. He says at the beginning of the
video that he is there as a representative of the church, and he is an
apostle, so this is the church’s official stance on marriage and what
they call same-sex attraction. BTW, there will be links to everything
we’re discussing in the show notes.

To set the scene for what you’re about to hear, this was the first of 2
videos the church has produced called Face to Face, where Young Single
Adults come together in a huge audience to do a Q\&A with the apostles
and other general authorities. The first voice you’ll hear is the 20
something questioner who’s been asking the majority of the questions,
then he sends it over to Pluto McFlappy Joules Jeffrey R Dodo bird for
the answer. Holland answers by sidestepping the issue and shifting the
discourse to talking about chastity instead of same-sex attraction and
homosexuality. Whenever he says chastity in his bumble-fuck of a hastily
prepared answer, understand that he actually means that gay people can
be attracted to each other, but they can’t act on it, implying they
should stay in hateful unfulfilling marriages with people of the
opposite sex because that’s what god commands; those are god’s
commandments. Another point to make before playing the video, he
obviously doesn’t understand the science of biology, psychology, and
anthropology in general, but he’s happy to tell us what God thinks about
these things.

Jeffrey Holland 1:13:20-1:16:10

Sorry for playing such a long clip, but that’s the problem with people
that don’t ever conclude a sentence when challenged by a concept with
which they’re uncomfortable. The thing is, nothing of what he said is
acceptance of the LGBT community. The church has softened on their
public face, but actions speak louder than words. And no actions spoke
louder than the controversy with the provo freedom festival this last
weekend. Every year in Utah a number of organizations host parades
through the major population areas. The committee which runs the Provo
parade is known as America’s freedom festival and this is the mission
statement on the front page of freedomfestival.org

“America's Freedom Festival at Provo is a private, non-profit,
non-political foundation whose mission is to celebrate, teach, honor,
and strengthen the traditional American values of God, family, freedom,
and country.”

At least they used an oxford comma, so I can’t fault their editors, but
they surely did put God before family, freedom, and country. Any time a
mission statement includes God next to all those I’m instantly
skeptical. But the reason I’m bringing this up is because Provo is home
to BYU, and is known to be a conservative college town filled with young
adult returned missionaries. The next generation of bigoted church
leaders are fostered in Provo, Utah.

The reason I bring this up is because 2 days before the freedom parade
last weekend they cancelled participation of ONE group in the festival.
The group is known as encircle and this is the mission statement on
encircletogether.org

“Encircle functions as a hub for resources that support the overall well
being of LGBTQ individuals. Encircle not only provides a physical space
for community gathering, skills training, individual counseling,
conflict resolution, and other resources, but will also serve as **a
literal example of what a typical Utah home that is inclusive of its
LGBTQ members, might look and feel like.”**

**The freedom festival claimed they removed encircle because they’re a
political group and Freedom festival tries to be non-partisan. Fuck
that, Freedom festival made this a political issue when it wasn’t
before. Let’s call a spade a spade here. The church found out about
Encircle being a resource for LGBTQ people, especially for youth, and
they considered part of the nefarious Gay-agenda to convert those little
Provo kids to being gay and they made a phone call to the organizers of
the Freedom Festival and told them to cut the rope to Encircle, citing
political reasons. Freedom Festival says Encircle is a political
movement, but just because an issue is wrongly politicized doesn’t mean
that a non-partisan, not-for-profit organization like Encircle who
advocates for equal rights is a political group. That just like saying
that because Freedom Festival includes God in their mission statement
that they’re a political group.**

**Can the church and the people associated not see the parallels to the
late 1970s? Can they not see they’re on the wrong side of history on
this social issue? Which brings me back to Savannah. What they did to
her is representative of what they’ve been doing with LGBTQ issues on
the broad spectrum. They put up these public statements saying they’re
totally cool with people who don’t fall into the sys-hetero category,
but as soon as it comes to actual practice, they’d much rather silence
the problem and those talking about it than actually deal with the
fundamental issue. If a 12-year-old threatens your beliefs system with a
3-minute talk, maybe your beliefs system is the problem.**
