---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 59 – CC Smith Entheogen Theory'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-59-cc-smith-entheogen-theory-pt1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-59-cc-smith-entheogen-theory
category: History
date: 2017-07-21 05:02:58 +0000
---

Ep 59 -- CC Smith Entheogen Theory

On this episode, we suspend the historical timeline to analyze the
Smith-Entheogen theory along with host of Psilly Rabbits Podcast, Cody
Noconi. Before that, we talk to Dan Wees of the Book of Mormon
Comparative to get an update on his project. Then we move into reading
part 1 of the Sunstone paper titled Revelation Through Hallucination, a
discourse on the Smith-entheogen theory. We end with the final
installment of the Patreon Pledge drive, issuing a call to arms for
those listeners located in Utah. Don't miss Sunstone and the live My
Book of Mormon show in SLC at Squatter's pub on July 29^th^, 2017!

Links:

Smith-Entheogen theory\
[http://realbookofmormon.org/smithentheogentheory](http://realbookofmormon.org/smithentheogentheory/)

Good Friday Experiment "Miracle at Marsh Chapel"\
<http://www.maps.org/news/multimedia-library/138-1962-good-friday-experiment>

MAPS Follow-up to Good Friday Experiment\
<http://www.maps.org/other-psychedelic-research/213-psilocybin-research/psilocybin-studies-completed/5508-the-good-friday-experiment-follow-up>

Erowid Plant and Root Database\
<https://www.erowid.org/>

Plants of the Gods\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZmjpK6KYqI>\
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/378208.Plants_of_the_Gods>

GET YOUR TICKETS FOR SUNSTONE SYMPOSIUM!!!\
<https://www.sunstonemagazine.com/>

Come to church with Marie Kent and I at the JS Memorial Building!\
<https://www.lds.org/maps/meetinghouses/@40.769715,-111.892079,17&lang=eng&id=meetinghouse:5336082-01-08>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Intro 7/20/17

We have so much to get to today. As per our MO with CC episodes, this is
going to be a bit longer than the regular episodes. To give you an
overview before we jump in, this episode is part 1 of a two-week primer
leading up to the Sunstone Sympsium in Salt lake city from July
26^th^-29^th^. Cody Noconi and I are doing a presentation about the
Joseph Smith-entheogen theory title Revelation Through Hallucination at
10:15 am in the Panorama East room, tickets are available at
sunstonemagazine.com, and then on Saturday evening, the 29^th^, Marie
and I will be doing a live show of My Book of Mormon, entry is free with
a suggested \$5 donation. These next couple of weeks are very busy,
which is why we're suspending the historical timeline and all other show
segments to just focus on Sunstone for this and next week. At the
beginning of this episode you'll hear a brief conversation I had with
Dan Wees about his completed Book of Mormon comparative project. Of
course, Patrons get access to the entire conversation as it went a bit
longer than expected. The second portion of today's episode will be part
one of Cody and I reading our research paper we'll be passing out at
Sunstone. We'll end the episode with discussing the Patreon pledge drive
and an exciting announcement about something Marie and I plan on doing
after the live show in SLC.

With that, let's get into the show beginning with my conversation with
Dan Wees.

Alright, that's it for the conversation with Dan. Check out
realbookofmormon.org to see his work there as well as the defector of
the faith portal with 1001 facts about Mormonism that are challenging to
belief. As said in the interview, Dan will be at Sunstone, so look
around for the friendly guy with a white beard and ask him about the
project.

Now on to the main segment for today, this is my discussion with Cody
Noconi, my research partner on the Smith-entheogen theory, and host of
the Psilly Rabbits podcast.

And that does it for the conversations on today's episode. Stay tuned
for next week to hear the actual Mormon portion of the Sunstone paper,
which will be airing just in time for the presentation and live show.
Before finishing up, I know we've gone really long this episode, but I
want to talk for a few minutes about something that came up in
conversation with Dan after we had stopped recording.

Dan and I spoke on the idea of Secular Mormonism and what it means to be
Mormon, ex-Mormon, or anti-Mormon. These are obviously simplistic
labels, but they function for the purposes of what we're about to
discuss. Last week I ranted about how this crusade isn't against
Mormons, it's against Mormonism. I made the point that I have nothing
but good to say about Mormons, as they're my friends and family; this
crusade which manifests itself as a research heavy podcast, Sunstone
presentations, and all the other projects I'm affiliated with, is
against a systematic cult which perpetuates lies through the mouths of
its unwitting parishioners. I've always been frustrated with the line
which perfectly describes me but is used to disparage or insinuate
something about somebody who does what I do, that line is: "You can
leave the church, but you can't leave it alone." I've taken issue with
this before, but I'm beginning to come to grips with it, and let me
share my reasoning.

Growing up in the church, it was pounded into my brain that I had to
view everything in my life through my Mormon lens. Every activity in
which I engaged, the question always hung over me, how will the affect
my standing in the church, or my testimony? If I do this thing, will I
have to talk to my bishop about it? Many people leave the church and
that's it, they're done with anything Mormonism, but for some of us,
that need to view everything through the church's eyes doesn't go away
once we leave the church. That's the greatest achievement of
brainwashing and mind control, but unfortunately for the organization
which fosters this totalitarian mindset, it cuts both ways. When some
people leave, they can't leave the cult alone because it's so deeply
ingrained in every part of their life.

This is the reason I'm slowly shying away from the label ex-Mormon in
lieu of Secular Mormon. I'm not an ex-Mormon, because I didn't actually
leave the church behind me the way ex-cons or ex-married people leave
that chapter behind them in life. Mormonism is my culture and I'm a
secular humanist. I'm a secular Mormon. When I was talking to Dan about
this concept, he said that Secular Mormon doesn't really fit him because
he's had his name removed from the roles, whereas I haven't so the box
fits me a little better than him. But the thought occurred to me, isn't
embracing the term ex-Mormon because you had your name removed from the
roles just giving undue power to the organization which claims to define
Mormonism? The Mormon church defines everything members do and even
further defines their social status by giving callings. If we leave the
church and have our names removed, doesn't calling ourselves ex-Mormon
just further allow the church to define who we are, thus furthering its
influence on those who've left the cult?

Look, the Mormon religion in general isn't going anywhere anytime soon.
It will continue to ebb and flow, slowly adapting to social pressures
which incite necessary and long overdue change. The only way we can push
them to change in ways that are social goods is by being up in their
face about how outdated they are on current social issues. For the
Mormon church to change, it requires humanist Mormons to drag it kicking
and screaming out of the 1950s and into the 21^st^ century.

This brings me to the final goal of the Patreon pledge drive month
before Sunstone. This upcoming Saturday's episode of My Book of Mormon
features something Marie and I thought up on the fly and talked about.
We told everybody that if we can get MyBoM the \$33 to the next Patreon
goal and NM the \$49 to the next goal, we would attend church together
on Sunday morning after the live show. I've had a bit of time since
Marie and I recorded to process this and think about the best way to do
it, and the thought occurred that none of what we do is for the money,
money is merely a byproduct of us doing what we love to do. So, this
approach is all wrong. We shouldn't hold this activity hostage for a few
dollars, that's what the church does with temple attendance and heaven.
So, don't tell Andrew Torrez this, but instead of making church the
Sunday morning the live show a patreon goal, Marie and I are making a
terrible business decision and we're going to church regardless of
whether or not we reach our next patreon goals. Just a brief sidenote,
lemme throw some maths your way. To get us up to our next goal, it
requires about 4/5ths of one percent of the listeners to sign up at a
dollar an episode, or 1/4^th^ of one percent of the listeners to sign up
at the 3-dollar Book of Exaltation level to reach that goal. That's my
way of saying, we're REALLY close to our next goal, and those
percentages are even smaller and more easily surmountable to get My BoM
up to the next patreon goal. It's not easy to ask for money, so instead,
for this episode, we're telling you what we're doing, and if you think
it's a good idea aimed at perpetuating a good overall cause, please
consider supporting our efforts. Marie and I are going to church on July
30^th^ regardless of patreon goals, but if you want to help us get to
those goals, it would be really awesome of you and it won't take much to
get us there.

We're sharing the details of our activities on Sunday July 30^th^ after
the live show because we're officially rallying the troops. Marie and I
will be attending the 11 a.m. church session of the 18^th^ ward at the
Joseph Smith memorial building, located at 15 E South Temple in SLC, and
you're all invited. They say visitors welcome, so let's test the
boundaries of that claim by showing up as a group. We're going to be
very respectful, but I have a feeling like we may stand out from the
crowd as the average age of people in that ward is like 89. I'll just
say, we can be respectful while still standing out. So, I encourage any
of you who plan on answering this rally cry by attending with us to wear
your rainbow or red Savannah ties, rainbow pins or wristbands, and most
importantly, let your porn shoulders out!

You may wonder why we chose that ward specifically. For starters, it
meets in the Joseph Smith memorial building, so booyah; and secondly,
the 18^th^ and Canyon wards, which meet there, are the home wards to a
bunch of general authorities and the prophet himself. It's rare any of
them actually attend, but there's the smallest inkling chance that an
apostle will be up on the stand and look out over our smiling faces,
rainbow garb, and porn shoulders. Maybe they'll be able to smell the
hangover on some of us from the live show the night before.... Just to
reiterate the ground rule, we aren't there to crash the congregation or
disrupt the regular proceedings, we're only there to show them that
secular humanist Mormons, and even interested never-mos like Marie,
exist and we are the younger generation to whom they need to appeal in
order to survive the 21^st^ century.

We need to stop letting the church define us as Mormon, ex-Mormon,
anti-Mormon, apostate or any other seemingly useful label. We are
secular Mormons. We are a movement that will roll over this
multi-billion-dollar worldwide corporation and force it into obscurity
until it conforms to humanism and disbands its authoritarian rule over
the lives of millions of people. Secular Mormons won't leave the church
alone after leaving it until Mormon'ism' stops being a mind controlling
cult. Needless to say, Marie and I have job security for the foreseeable
future.

Outro

But most of all, thank you to our imperatively important and wonderfully
devoted listeners, for lending me your ear.
