---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 79 - CC Polygamy Pt2 Joseph Smith'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-79-cc-polygamy-pt2-joseph-smith/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-79-cc-polygamy-pt2-joseph-smith
category: History
date: 2017-12-01 07:12:22 +0000
---

Ep 79 -- CC Polygamy Pt2 Joseph Smith

On this episode, we jump into part 2 of our dive into the history of
polygamy, and we're going to focus in on Joseph Smith and Mormonism
specifically. For ease of listening we break this episode into three
separate segments (The Entered Apprentice, The Fellowcraft, The Master).

Links:

Plural Marriage in Kirtland and Nauvoo\
<https://www.lds.org/topics/plural-marriage-in-kirtland-and-nauvoo?lang=eng>

Joseph Smith: Making of a Prophet\
<http://signaturebookslibrary.org/joseph-smith-09/>

Eber Howe Mormonism Unvailed\
<http://www.fullerconsideration.com/images/mormonismunvaile00howe.pdf>

Fair Mormon on Eliza Winters\
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/Early_womanizer>

Hales-Vogel open exchange about Winters and Stowells\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/hales-vogel-2-private-correspondence/>

1830s Joseph Smith polygamy\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s>

Fanny Alger\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/common-questions/plural-marriages-sexual/fanny-alger-evidence-of-sexuality/>

Statement on Marriage 1835\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/statement-on-marriage-circa-august-1835/2>

Sexual Grooming\
<https://www.allure.com/story/what-is-sexual-grooming-abuse>

Nauvoo Expositor\
<https://archive.org/stream/NauvooExpositor1844/Nauvoo_Expositor_1844#page/n2/mode/1up>

Joseph Jackson Mormon Expose\
<http://www.olivercowdery.com/smithhome/1840s/1844Jack.htm>

Wilhelm Wyl interviews William Law\
<http://www.mrm.org/law-interview>

Last Testimony of Sister Emma Hale Smith Bidamon\
<http://www.mormonthink.com/files/emma-interview-1879.pdf>

D&C 132 original revelation\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Today begins part 2 of our dive into the history of polygamy, and we're
going to focus in on Joseph Smith and Mormonism specifically. Before
getting started, let me give you a peek behind the curtains, or into the
hat, or whatever euphemism you prefer. In the past few weeks I've
experienced a powerful reinvigoration. I've been picking up tidbits of
Mormon polygamy for years now and have accrued just enough knowledge to
feel comfortable with the topic, but as of very recently, diving much
deeper into this subject where I've only scratched the surface before,
I've experienced a personal renaissance in my love for Mormon history.
Today's episode is the product of me gaining a much deeper grasp on a
subject to which I've previously only had a fleeting understanding of.
Right at the onset, I must apologize in advance. Every time I jumped
into a single subject in compiling these notes, that subject became
deeper and deeper the more I researched it, and the whole subject is
incredibly fascinating. As for my apology, this episode is significantly
longer than initially intended. If you've enjoyed our previous CC
episodes and the abnormally long-form structure of them, I hope you'll
enjoy this episode just as much. For those seeking a shorter and more
digestible listening experience, this episode is broken up into three
simple segments (The Entered Apprentice, The Fellowcraft, The Master)
with brief song intermissions marking the change from one segment to the
next. Hopefully that will help with ease of consumption of the material
for those of you who can't devote multiple hours in one sitting to a
single episode of a single podcast when there's so much good content in
other feeds awaiting you. The reason I didn't break this up into
separate episodes is because I wanted all the information in one place.
Joseph Smith's polygamy is a huge topic which can't be realized or
justified in one sitting, so today we're hitting the entirety of
Joseph's life skimming over the surface and stories of some of the
remarkable women who were affected by the practice. We'll leave deeper
dives into each of their stories for the historical timeline in the
regular episodes. This episode serves as a primer to the rest of Nauvoo
history intertwined with Mormon polygamy, and lays the groundwork for
the broader practice of Mormon polygamy throughout the rest of Mormon
history into modern times. Without further ado, I present my personal
take on Joseph Smith's free-love and polygamy. Enjoy!

Joseph Smith's polygamy is always a subject of Mormon history which
divides groups of people, yet entices so much fascination and study from
so many angles. Beginning with the earliest efforts of Joseph Smith III,
young prophet of the Reorganized church, historians have been grappling
with Joseph Smith's polygamy ever since the practice of it led to his
untimely death. As with last episode, I'm not going to spend much time
discussing what ought to be, to spend our time more effectively
examining what simply is or has been.

Part 1: The Entered Apprentice

Often when we introduce the subject of Joseph Smith's polygamy, it's not
long before the conversation evolves into some kind of labeling.
Labeling is useful, it sums up an entire concept in a succinct word or
phrase, so what labels have been thrown around about Joseph Smith's
personality and sexual profile. When most Mormons talk about Polygamy,
they've been instructed that polygamy was introduced for the purpose of
financially and emotionally supporting widows and wives of unbelievers.
There were too many women and not enough men, so the Mormon forefathers
engaged in polygamy for practical purposes, a male breadwinner to feed
multiple families. Others will view his practices through the eyes of
piety, Joseph was getting married and sealed to multiple women to ensure
their salvation. What better path to salvation than being sealed to the
prophet of the restoration himself? Traditional Mormon doctrine holds
that everyone must trace their spiritual connection to the prophet
through some means. Modernly, when a man is given the priesthood, he's
issued a card with his priesthood lineage tracing the steps his
priesthood took to get to him from Joseph Smith. Women are then sealed
to the men in the temple sealing ceremony, binding that wife to the
priesthood and ensuring both of their places among the Mormon family in
heaven. Through this lens, Joseph was a savior-polygamist, which also
explains his sealings to men known as the law of adoption.

Other people aren't quite so charitable. Some look at his practices as
predatory. Some label his courtship of Helen Mar Kimball at the age of
14 as pedophilia, even though it's wholly inaccurate. Pedophilia has a
strict definition and stops being the case right around the age of
pubescence, then the term Ephebophilia becomes the accurate definition.
One needn't appeal to Helen Mar Kimball alone to see predatory sexual
practices by the prophet as a number of his marriages only came after
incessant cajoling from authority figures, other wives, and even from
Joseph himself.

Some people like to take a softer, yet still critical, approach on
Joseph Smith's sexual and marriage practices by saying he was a product
of his time. Polygamy wasn't all that uncommon in his day and age, and
we spent all part 1 discussing just how prevalent it was leading up to
19^th^-century American puritanical societies.

These labels we use to generalize Joseph Smith are useful for
conversation purposes, but each definition is somehow lacking. The
reason the labels are so compelling yet hotly disputed is there were so
many examples in Joseph's 30+ marriages that each perspective can use
details from any number of them to justify the specific label they're
slapping onto Joseph.

For this very reason, personally, I'm at pains to try and construct my
own way of discussing Joseph Smith's polygamy. So much has been written,
so much more has been said in dealing with the topic and I doubt that I
can contribute anything new to the discussion. Let's try a bit of a
wholistic approach when viewing Joseph's history with women. He was
sealed to his first official Nauvoo polygamist wife, Louisa Beaman in
April of 1841, but Joseph had a long and colorful sexual history prior
to that instance.

Not much is known of Joseph's history before he entered the public
spotlight with Mormonism in 1830. Much has been written about him after
1830, especially after his death in 1844, but his own writings prior to
1829 are limited to a few letters and little else. Joseph's later
reflections on his own life prior to Mormonism are extremely biased, but
often the best source we have.

To properly understand Joseph's views on sexuality, we need to put his
life in the context of Victorian America with heavily puritanical
influences. People didn't discuss sexuality publicly. Society had some
fascinating taboos on the subject as a whole and society today is still
overshadowed by the ignorance of human sexuality embraced by the
19^th^-century and societies long before. Historians are left with
snatching a few catch-phrases implying what was considered sexually
immoral such as "vicious habits" and "unchristian-like conduct with
women," in order to posit sexual indiscretions because these topics
weren't discussed openly.

Many people will try to excuse Joseph Smith's conduct by saying he was a
prophet, but also a man, and therefore imperfect and subject to the same
temptations as every other human. While the latter part of that
statement is true, it's only due to society's perspective and the
inherent hypocrisy that Joseph's conduct violates the former claim of
piety.

Joseph's views on sex and marriage came into conflict with society at
large, which forced his dealings, which may have been deemed acceptable
in a different time and society as normal, into underground clandestine
enclaves of vicious whoredoms and gluttony. But Joseph was a man with
attractions and vice that many men deal with in our everyday society.
His views on sexuality were fluid and we can see an evolution of what he
considered temptation and vicious habits morph into divinely sanctioned
laws commanded by God to attain exaltation.

To examine the first inklings of Joseph's sexuality, we need to grant
the autobiographical tendencies in the first 2 books of the Book of
Mormon, 1 and 2^nd^ Nephi. This is the earliest view into his life
coming from his own mind, dictated to Oliver Cowdery as scribe. A number
of historians have linked autobiographical tendencies of Joseph Smith's
life in the Book of Mormon.

Dan Vogel asserts a number of documentable analogies in the Book of
Mormon to the plight of the Smith family in his book Joseph Smith Making
of a Prophet. From chapter 9 we read:

"It was fitting that Joseph's book began with a family that was, in many
ways, comparable to the Smith family. Both were displaced and
disinherited, having left the land of their inheritance to settle in a
more promising region. More importantly, both were conflicted over
religion, particularly over the validity of a father's dreams. Like
Joseph's father, Lehi received coded messages in dreams: "Behold, I have
dreamed a dream; or, in other words, I have seen a vision," he said (1
Ne. 8:2). In Lehi's first dream, God appeared and warned him of
Jerusalem's impending destruction and instructed him to flee with his
family into the wilderness (1 Ne. 1:5-15). Another of his dreams is
remarkably similar to Joseph Sr.'s dream of the tree of life with the
exception that Lehi's two oldest sons, Laman and Lemuel, refused to come
with him to the tree and partake of its fruit (1 Ne. 8). Thus, Joseph
transformed his father's dream of family unity into the reality of
family division.

The account in the Book of Mormon is narrated by the youngest of Lehi's
four sons, Nephi, who like Joseph Smith becomes a zealous defender of
his father's dreams. Nephi's two oldest brothers, Laman and Lemuel,
oppose Lehi's prophecies and ridicule his visions as "the foolish
imaginations of his heart" (1 Ne. 2:11). The remaining brother, Sam,
joins Nephi in supporting the father. Sariah, Lehi's wife, experiences a
brief period of doubt in which she "complained against" Lehi and
derogatorily called him "a visionary man" (5:2). Eventually she is
convinced of the truthfulness of her husband's dreams (vv. 7-8). In
Lehi's dream, she joins him at the tree of life (8:14-16). At this
point, Sariah disappears from the Book of Mormon narrative. Unlike Lehi,
her death goes unreported.

The parallels to the Smith family are not seen as much in direct
representations as in more subtle emotional
profiles.[2](http://signaturebookslibrary.org/joseph-smith-09/#mormon2) Joseph's
older and younger brothers, Hyrum and Samuel, are much like Laman and
Lemuel to the extent that, in Joseph's emotional language, they
"rebelled" against the authority of Joseph Sr.'s dreams and joined the
Presbyterian church---even though in the Book of Mormon story both Laman
and Lemuel are older than Nephi. One might see Joseph's two older
siblings, \[p. 132\]Hyrum and Sophronia, in the same light, the latter
having also joined the Presbyterian church. Nephi and Joseph occupy the
fourth position among their siblings in their respective families,
although again somewhat differently. Nephi was the fourth of Lehi's
sons, but nothing is said concerning the ordering of his sisters (2 Ne.
5:6). Joseph was the fourth of Joseph Sr.'s sons only if one includes
the unnamed infant who died before Alvin's birth. At the same time,
Joseph was the fourth of the living Smith children. One important
difference exists in that Alvin died before the family became fractured.
Regardless, Joseph's decision to write about a family that was seriously
divided over the meaning of its patriarch's dreams is significant."

<http://signaturebookslibrary.org/joseph-smith-09/>

From later in the same chapter:

"Unlike Joseph, Nephi is not silent about religious matters. There may
be something of Joseph's feelings and attitudes about his family
situation in Nephi's words and actions, emotions that Joseph may have
been reluctant to express openly to his family. Nephi is closely allied
with his father, Lehi, both in name and spirit; indeed, their names have
a familiar sound, just as Laman's and Lemuel's names indicate an
alliance. Nephi wants to experience the same dream that his father had
of the tree of life. Before long, he excels his father in both visions
and scriptural interpretations, not only expounding the meaning of his
father's vision but adding to and, more importantly, correcting his
version. He becomes a second witness to his father's gift by
experiencing it himself, and not in any ambiguous terms, but in waking
visions that endow his father's testimony with even greater authority (1
Ne. 2:16; 3:1; 11:1; 15:1)."

If we stick with this theme, we find in the Book of Mormon the
introduction of the daughters of Ishmael for the sons of Lehi to take as
wives. To put the 7^th^ chapter of 1^st^ Nephi into context, we need to
understand a little about the Smith family history. Sometime in 1825,
Joseph Smith Sr. and some of his sons contracted to hunt for buried
treasure with a man named Josiah Stowell. They commenced their digging
operations on the Susquehanna river near what was then known as Harmony,
Pennsylvania. For a short time, the treasure-digging group boarded with
the Isaac Hale family, during which Joseph courted his wife-to-be Emma.
The treasure digging venture would prove fruitless, but Joseph did
acquire his first wife out of the business trip, so some might say he
struck gold. From Chapter 7 of Vogel's Making of a Prophet.

"One day, as Lucy recalled, Joseph took his parents aside to tell them
his plans to \[p. 88\]marry Emma Hale, explaining that "he had felt so
lonely ever since Alvin's death that he had come to the conclusion of
getting married if we had no objections." He said that "he thought that
no young woman that he ever was acquainted with was better calculated to
render the man of her choice happy than Miss Emma Hale." Joseph Sr. had
met Emma and was delighted by the news. He suggested that his son bring
the young woman home to live with them. Lucy was especially anxious to
meet for the first time the young woman her son had
chosen.["](http://signaturebookslibrary.org/joseph-smith-07/#mormon3)

<http://signaturebookslibrary.org/joseph-smith-07/>

Joseph's mind was fertile soil for his own real-world experiences to
flourish and grow into legendary tales of great prophet-heroes and
dastardly fraternal arch enemies. From chapter 7 of the first Book of
Nephi, we can possibly see a view into the competitive nature between
brothers in courting the beautiful Isaac Hale daughters.

"1 And now I would that ye might know, that after my father, Lehi, had
made an end of prophesying concerning his seed, it came to pass that the
Lord spake unto him again, saying that it was not meet for him, Lehi,
that he should take his family into the wilderness alone; but that his
sons should take daughters to wife, that they might raise up seed unto
the Lord in the land of promise.

2 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him that I, Nephi, and my
brethren, should again return unto the land of Jerusalem, and bring down
Ishmael and his family into the wilderness.

3 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did again, with my brethren, go
forth into the wilderness to go up to Jerusalem.

4 And it came to pass that we went up unto the house of Ishmael, and we
did gain favor in the sight of Ishmael, insomuch that we did speak unto
him the words of the Lord.

5 And it came to pass that the Lord did soften the heart of Ishmael, and
also his household, insomuch that they took their journey with us down
into the wilderness to the tent of our father.

6 And it came to pass that as we journeyed in the wilderness, behold
Laman and Lemuel, and two of the daughters of Ishmael, and the
two sons of Ishmael and their families, did rebel against us; yea,
against me, Nephi, and Sam, and their father, Ishmael, and his wife, and
his three other daughters.

7 And it came to pass in the which rebellion, they were desirous to
return unto the land of Jerusalem.

8 And now I, Nephi, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts,
therefore I spake unto them, saying, yea, even unto Laman and unto
Lemuel: Behold ye are mine elder brethren, and how is it that ye are so
hard in your hearts, and so blind in your minds, that ye have need that
I, your younger brother, should speak unto you, yea, and set
an example for you?

9 How is it that ye have not hearkened unto the word of the Lord?"

<https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/7.16-21>

After that Nephi goes on to lecture all those who were rebelling. Should
we grant this as artistic license based on real-world scenarios Joseph
Smith experienced, we see how his older brothers reacted to his
lecturing, and Nephi suffered the consequences expected of a younger
brother when lecturing his stronger, older brothers, who may have
overreacted to put on a show for the daughters of Ishmael. Nephi gains
supernatural abilities Joseph likely dreamed of having to hold his own
against his abusive older brothers.

"16 And it came to pass that when I, Nephi, had spoken these words unto
my brethren, they were angry with me. And it came to pass that they did
lay their hands upon me, for behold, they were exceedingly wroth, and
they did bind me with cords, for they sought to take away my life, that
they might leave me in the wilderness to be devoured by wild beasts.

17 But it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord, saying: O Lord,
according to my faith which is in thee, wilt thou deliver me from the
hands of my brethren; yea, even give me strength that I may burst these
bands with which I am bound.

18 And it came to pass that when I had said these words, behold, the
bands were loosed from off my hands and feet, and I stood before my
brethren, and I spake unto them again.

19 And it came to pass that they were angry with me again, and sought to
lay hands upon me; but behold, one of the daughters of Ishmael, yea, and
also her mother, and one of the sons of Ishmael, did plead with my
brethren, insomuch that they did soften their hearts; and they did cease
striving to take away my life.

20 And it came to pass that they were sorrowful, because of their
wickedness, insomuch that they did bow down before me, and did plead
with me that I would forgive them of the thing that they had done
against me.

21 And it came to pass that I did frankly forgive them all that they had
done, and I did exhort them that they would pray unto the Lord their God
for forgiveness. And it came to pass that they did so. And after they
had done praying unto the Lord we did again travel on our journey
towards the tent of our father."

One wonders if the daughter of Ishmael which came to Nephi's rescue
reflects Emma stepping in during an altercation between brothers to stop
Alvin and Hiram from abusing Joseph. In a family where Joseph was less
desirable than his older brothers, the competition for attention from
similarly aged women must have been fierce in the Smith household.
Whatever sympathy Joseph may have garnered from Emma was realized when
he stole her away from the Hale home when Isaac was not present and they
subsequently eloped in South Bainbridge right across the New York border
in 1827.

Soon after Joseph and Emma were married, accusations arose of Joseph's
infidelity. Published in Mormonism Unvailed by Eber D. Howe in 1834 was
a testimony by a neighbor of the Smiths named Levi Lewis. In it's
entirety from Mormonism Unvailed it reads as such:

"Levi Lewis states, that he has "been acquainted with Joseph Smith Jr.
and Martin Harris, and that he has heard them both say, adultery was no
crime. Harris said he did not blame Smith for his (Smith's) attempt to
seduce Eliza Winters &c.;"---Mr. Lewis says that he "knows Smith to be a
liar;\--that he saw him (Smith) intoxicated at three different times
while he was composing the Book of Mormon, and also that he has heard
Smith when driving oxen, use language of the greatest profanity. Mr.
Lewis also testifies that he heard Smith say he (Smith) was as good as
Jesus Christ;\--that it was as bad to injure him as it was to injure
Jesus Christ." "With regard to the plates, Smith said God had deceived
him---which was the reason he (Smith) did not show them."

<http://www.fullerconsideration.com/images/mormonismunvaile00howe.pdf>

This was collected by Doctor Philastus Hurlbut when he was compiling the
research to sell to Eber Howe for Mormonism Unvailed. Levi Lewis was
biased against Joseph Smith and Mormonism Unvailed was the first
full-length anti-Mormon publication to be published. Regardless of that,
we need to deal with the claim that Joseph may have had relations with
Eliza Winters soon after his marriage to Emma. A quick look on
FairMormon.org provides an apologists answer.

"There are serious problems with these claims. It seems extraordinarily
implausible that Joseph \"admitted\" that God had deceived him, and thus
was not able to show the plates to anyone. Joseph insisted that he had
shown the plates to people, and the Three and Eight Witnesses all
published testimony to that effect. Despite apostasy and alienation from
Joseph Smith, none denied that witness.

The claim to have seen Joseph drunk during the translation is
entertaining. If Joseph were drunk, this only makes the production of
the Book of Mormon more impressive. But, this sounds like little more
than idle gossip, designed to bias readers against Joseph as a
\"drunkard.\"

A study of Joseph\'s letters and life from this period make it difficult
to believe that Joseph would insist he was \"as good as Jesus Christ.\"
Joseph\'s private letters reveal him to be devout, sincere, and almost
painfully aware of his dependence on
God. [\[6\]](https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/Early_womanizer#cite_note-6)

Thus, three of the charges that are unmentioned by Van Wagoner are
extraordinarily implausible. They are clearly efforts to simply paint
Joseph in a bad light: make him into a pretend prophet who thinks he\'s
better than Jesus, who admits to being deceived, and who gets drunk.
Such a portrayal would be welcome to skeptical ears. This Joseph is
ridiculous, not to be taken seriously.

We can now consider the claim that Martin and Joseph claimed that
adultery was no crime, and that Joseph attempted the seduction of Eliza
Winters. Recent work has also uncovered Eliza Winters\' identity. She
was a young woman at a meeting on 1 November 1832 in Springville
Township, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania. While on a preaching mission
with his brother Emer, Martin Harris announced that Eliza \"has had a
bastard child.\"

Eliza sued Martin for slander, asking for \$1000 for the damage done to
her \"good name, fame, behavior and character\" because his words
\"render her infamous and scandalous among her neighbors.\" Martin won
the suit; Eliza could not prove libel, likely because she had no good
character to
sully. [\[7\]](https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/Early_womanizer#cite_note-7)

This new information calls the Lewis affidavit into even greater
question. We are to believe that Martin, who risked and defended a libel
suit for reproving Eliza for fornication, thinks that adultery is \"no
crime\"? Eliza clearly has no reason to like Joseph and the
Mormons---why did she not provide Hurlbut with an affidavit regarding
Joseph\'s scandalous behavior? Around 1879, Eliza gave information to
Frederick Mather for a book about early Mormonism. Why did she not
provide testimony of Joseph\'s attempt to seduce her?

It seems far more likely that Eliza was known for her low morals, and
her name became associated with the Mormons in popular memory, since she
had been publicly rebuked by a Mormon preacher and lost her court suit
against him. When Levi Lewis was approached by Hurlbut for material
critical of Joseph Smith, he likely drew on this association."\
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/Early_womanizer>

I found an open email exchange between two of the foremost Joseph Smith
and polygamy scholars, Dan Vogel and Brian Hales, Hales, of course, runs
Joseph Smith's polygamy and works with the Joseph Smith papers project
related to Smith's polygamy. Here's their back and forth and I'll even
include Hale's superiority of "light" righteousness asserted against
Vogel and Vogel's succinct and perfect reply to the assertion:

"You may recall our discussions regarding some items in your EMD volumes
(for which I give thanks for the incredible effort compiling). Despite
my brief interaction with them, I detected some pretty heavy bias.  You
remember the Nan Hill quote that I would argue would be categorized as
"dubious" by an objective reviewer, but you generously assess:  "the
early rumors cannot be dismissed too quickly."  And then there is the
your quote:  "His \[Joseph Smith's\] July 1830 trial in South Bainbridge
included testimony accusing him of improper conduct with two of Josiah
Stowell's daughters, Miriam and Rhoda."  We've talked about how there is
no "testimony," only assumption.  Additionally, I would add the Eliza
Winters interview which you characterized her apparent silence on the
topic as "an accusation she neither confirmed nor denied," goes well
beyond the statement (and I think that it is very likely that the topic
did come up and Mather didn't like the answer).

I guess my question is whether you acknowledge any bias in these types
of statements and if you do, then are you concerned?  I see biases that
bring me back to my first email:  "If it turns out that Joseph Smith was
a true prophet of the living God, then your labors and products may be
deemed as perhaps the most sophisticated of all oppositional endeavors
this planet ever experienced."

Understandably, you classify my reference to "conviction" as "false
confidence."  But, just to be complete,  I would classify the biases in
your presentations simply as "darkness" in the context of  D&C 50:24: 
"That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and
continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter
and brighter until the perfect day."  This "light" is quite real to me
(I wrote a book on it).  Do you see my feelings about light and darkness
as the result of a "frenzied mind" or as some other form of
self-deception?"

Here is Vogel's interesting reply:

"Regarding "testimony" at the 1830 trial, JS was accused of improper
conduct with Stowell's daughters, although apparently it wasn't verified
by them when they testified. I believe this is implied in JS's telling
of the event, although you require it to be explicitly stated. Is it
possible that your bias prevents you from seeing the very obvious
context of Stowell's daughters being called to testify? Moreover, I used
"testimony" in the sense of someone testifying, but you insisted that I
produce written "testimony" and asserted that I was being deceptive.
Again, JS strongly implied that his accusers were hoping to extract from
Stowell's daughters evidence of sexual impropriety. I insist that my
interpretation is reasonable and not just an assumption.

My footnote to Levi Lewis's statement about Eliza Winters mentioning her
later interview and that she neither confirmed nor denied the rumor is
also reasonable. It's a simple statement, and readers needed to know
that information. They can decide what it means. However, you give the
speculation that the question was asked and left out because Mather
didn't like the answer, which oddly shows both your bias and willingness
to go beyond the evidence.

In all honesty, I don't see why you are so concerned about these
footnotes in EMD. I see them as quite normal and expected. My biography
is a different matter. It's was intended to be more interpretive and
provocative.

Your statement about what my work means in light of JS be a true prophet
or fraud really doesn't concern me. I'm trying to be as honest and fair
as I can. That's all I can do.

I regard your feelings about light and darkness as just an opinion
expressed in religious terminology.

Regards,

Dan"

<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/hales-vogel-2-private-correspondence/>

I'll spare commenting on Vogel's response to Hale's assertion of
interpreting facts about Smith in "light" versus "darkness" and just
focus on the issue at hand, Eliza Winters. There's no way to know if
Joseph Smith and Eliza Winters had adulterous relations so soon after
Smith's marriage to Emma Hale, but the fact that the gossip or
conjecture existed says volumes about Joseph's personality and how
others viewed him.

The secondary issue discussed by Vogel and Hales is the 1830 court
appearance in which Joseph was put on the stand and asked about his
possible relations with Josiah Stowell's daughters, Miriam and Rhoda.
Soon after the Book of Mormon was published, Joseph travelled to meet
with the family of Joseph Knight Sr., in Colesville New York, where he'd
earned a mischievous reputation as a counterfeiter, juggler, and
disturber of the peace. Joseph was arrested and tried twice in one week.
During the second trial, the court proceedings were put on hold so the
daughters of Josiah Stowell could be summoned to the witness stand in
order to testify about their relations with Joseph Smith.

From the Vogel HoC vol 1:65-6

"After a few more such attempts, the court was detained for a time, in
order that two young women (daughters to Mr. Stoal) with whom I had at
times kept company; might be sent for, in order, if possible to elicit
something from them which might be made a pretext against me. The young
ladies arrived and were severally examined, touching my character, and
conduct in general but particularly as to my behavior towards them both
in public and private, when they both bore such testimony in my favor,
as left my enemies without a pretext on their account."

From later after the second trial:

"The court finding the charges against me not sustained, I was
accordingly acquitted, to the great satisfaction of my friends, and
vexation of my enemies, who were still determined upon molesting me, but
through the instrumentality of my new friend, the constable, I was
enabled to escape them and make my way in safety to my wife's sister's
house, where I found my wife awaiting with much anxiety the issue of
those ungodly proceedings: and with her in company next day, arrived in
safety at my own house."

Joseph Smith was a bit of a pariah in many communities for his conduct.
The charge specifically for which he was brought to these two trials was
being a disorderly person. He'd swindled Josiah Stowell out of living
expenses and business contracts related to treasure-digging, and some of
the friends and family of Stowell weren't too pleased with Smith's
conduct, and subsequently filed the suit on Stowell's behalf.

Miriam and Rhoda Stowell as well as Eliza Winters provide some of the
first examples of Smith's affinity toward intimacy beyond status quo
monogamy. Whether or not he actually had these relations or any level of
intimacy with these women, the public reaction sent a signal to Joseph
Smith that society wouldn't accept his views on love and relationships.
He would need to keep these practices hidden from the public eye if he
was to enjoy free-love and polygamy to its fullest extent.

The first theater of Smith's polygamous operations was during the first
mission trip for the early Mormons to the Lamanites living on the
western border in Missouri. Joseph called brothers Oliver Cowdery,
Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson, and Peter Whitmer to proselyte in a
revelation on 17 October 1830 now canonized into D&C 28. After the
missionaries had set up camp in Jackson County, Missouri, Joseph and
Sidney Rigdon teamed up and converted a number of the Ohio Rigdonites to
Mormonism. Subsequently, Rigdon and Smith traveled to Missouri to
dedicate the plot of land as the Mormon Zion with new temple grounds.
During this trip, Joseph delivered a revelation dealing with one of his
detailed instructions to the missionaries there. The actual text of this
revelation didn't survive, but William Wines Phelps recounted it in
1861, 30 years after it was supposedly given. From Joseph Smiths
Polygamy.org, written by Brian Hales, we find his treatment of the
historicity of the claimed revelation.

"Reportedly while they were on this mission Joseph received a revelation
relevant to polygamy. Some of the missionaries were to marry Native
American women. In 1861, thirty years after the revelation was
reportedly dictated, W. W. Phelps wrote a letter to President Young
sharing the substance of the
revelation.[5](http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s/#link_ajs-fn-id_5-62)

The details found in the revelation raise questions whether Phelps was
actually recalling its content or was working from contemporaneous notes
or from some other source. The statement is far too detailed for a
three-day-old recollection let alone a thirty-year-old one.

That Phelps would bring this to the attention of President Young so many
years after it occurred is curious and appears somewhat random as well.

Phelps ended his letter to President Young writing:

'About three years after this was given, I asked brother Joseph \[Smith,
Jr.\] privately, how "we," that were mentioned in the revelation could
take wives from the "natives"---as we were all married men? He replied
instantly "In th\[e\] same manner that Abraham took Hagar and Katurah
\[Keturah\]; and Jacob took Rachel Bilhah and Zilpah: by
revelation---the saints of the Lord are always directed by revelation.'

Whatever Joseph taught at that time regarding plural marriage apparently
did not make much of a stir among the early Saints who heard it because
no other contemporaneous accounts are found. In addition, when the
practice was started in Nauvoo, it appears that no one recalled it, and
the Prophet never referenced the incident."

Hearkening back to the Old Testament prophet's, Joseph was able to
justify the practice of polygamy in a way which wouldn't be offensive to
those practicing it. This represents Joseph's first utterances of
polygamy being sanctioned as a divine marital practice in the church,
but it wouldn't be for another decade before he began creating the
ceremony and dogma surrounding the practice in Nauvoo. However, I find
Hales treatment of this practice to contradict something else he covers
on that same page, wherein he deals with early accusations of polygamy
against the church.

"Novel religious groups were common in the 1830s. Elizabeth A. Clark and
Herbert Richardson observed: "Nineteenth-century America abounded in
utopian societies; as many as five hundred such communities may have
flourished in this
period."[7](http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s/#link_ajs-fn-id_7-62) Some
experimented with marital and sexual practices, which focused suspicion
on all of the groups.

Early Latter-day Saint efforts to live the law of consecration, which
sustained traditional monogamy, were misunderstood. The Evangelical
Magazine and Gospel Advocate, Utica, N.Y., reported in their February 5,
1831 issue: "They \[the Mormons\] have all things in common, and
dispense with the marriage covenant."

Henry Carroll, who was in the Kirtland area in 1832, recalled in 1885:
"It was claimed all things were common, even to free love, among the
Mormons at
Kirtland."[8](http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s/#link_ajs-fn-id_8-62)

Historian Mark Staker observed: "As late as 1835, Joseph was still
trying to counter outside rumors that had apparently arisen as a result
of the Morley Family and early Mormonite confusion before his arrival in
Kirtland."[9](http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s/#link_ajs-fn-id_9-62)

Allegations of improprieties followed the LDS Church, inciting a variety
of denials. Erastus Snow and Benjamin Winchester printed a plainly
worded denial in 1841 in An address to the citizens of Salem and
vicinity: "It has been stated in public journals that we hold all things
in common, or that we have a community of good\[s\], also of wives.
These charges we positively deny: for we hold no such things nor never
did. ... The rules of the church forbid anything like unvirtuous
conduct, and they are righteously enforced."\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/history/polygamy-early-1830s>

With Levi Lewis' 1833 assertion that Martin Harris and Joseph Smith
considered adultery not to be a crime, added to Joseph's 1831 revelation
that the missionaries were to take First-nation women as wives like the
prophets of old, compounded by the fact that outside sources were
claiming the Mormons were practicing free-love, we can begin to
construct Joseph Smith's stance on marriage as something in conflict
with the Puritanical Victorian status quo of strict or serial monogamy.
There is little existing evidence of Joseph practicing free-love or
divinely sanctioned polygamy during the church's infancy in Kirtland,
Ohio. The only real case we can nail down for sure is Fanny Alger. Any
names or situations beyond Joseph's relationship with Alger are very
challenging to substantiate.

It should be noted that the effort of historians to find a substantive
quote or revelation from Joseph about polygamy prior to the 1843
revelation canonized as D&C 132 in an exercise in revisionist history.
They need Joseph to have received a revelation from God about polygamy
to justify his free-love relationships prior to Nauvoo for him to still
fall into the category of pious prophet. Mormons need Joseph to not be
an adulterer to fit the narrative they've constructed for him, but at
the time Joseph was having multiple affairs, I doubt he cared what
historians and believing Mormons more than a century in the future would
think of his actions. Joseph was obviously concerned with the
perceptions of his contemporaries which is why he hid his actions
instead of flaunting free-love like the Onieda group, but this effort
for Mormon apologists to substantiate a legitimate polygamy revelation
prior to Fanny Alger is an exercise in futility. Call it what it is,
Joseph liked sex and he didn't let Victorian monogamy constrain his
actions, even if he was forced to resort to predatory practices to make
it happen from time to time.

Joseph's affair with Fanny Alger made waves in Kirtland. It was widely
known by many people living in Kirtland, particularly the Mormon elite,
and the reaction to Smith's impropriety is really well documented, even
if the subtle details of the actual affair are a bit fuzzy.

Brian Hales acknowledges the existence of 5 documents substantiating
Smith's affair with Fanny Alger:

"Five documents indicate that Joseph Smith may have experienced conjugal
relations with his first plural wife, Fanny Alger. The earliest is from
Oliver Cowdery in a private letter written January 21, 1838:

I did not fail to affirm that what I had said was strictly true. A
dirty, nasty, filthy scrape\["affair" overwritten\] of his and Fanny
Alger's was talked over in which I strictly declared that I had never
deviated from the truth on the matter. 

The next reference is thirty-four years later from William McLellin:

\[O\]ne night she \[Emma Smith\] missed Joseph and Fanny Alger. She went
to the barn and saw him and Fanny in the barn together alone. She looked
through a crack and saw the transaction!! She told me this story too was
verily true."

It goes on to detail another interview by William McLellin, a quote from
Wilhelm Wyl, and finally an account from first-hand witness, Benjamin
Franklin Johnson written in 1903. Alger was living with the Smiths at
the time of the incident. She was seen as basically a younger sister to
Emma Smith, who had taken Alger under her wing to teach her homemaking
skills beginning in 1832. Whether or not McLellin accurately reported
Emma catching Joseph and Fanny in the middle of a sex act in the barn,
the consequences of the affair are conclusive, Emma kicked Fanny out of
the house who subsequently moved to Indiana and married another man
named Solomon Custer who wasn't a Mormon.

To find more detail on the Smith-Alger affair, we're forced to reference
a second-hand account from the son of Levi Hancock named Mosiah Hancock.
Mosiah offers some interesting details of the relationship between
Joseph and Fanny, including the reaction of Church leadership to the
relationship. Corroborated by other evidence, Mosiah successfully pushes
the first practice of polygamy in the church to 1832 or early 1833.

"Concerning the doctrine of celestial marriage the Prophet told my
father \[Levi Hancock\] in the days of Kirtland, that it was the will of
the Lord for His servants who were faithful to step forth in that
order... My father made some things known to me concerning those days,
and the part he took with the Prophet in trying to assist him to start
the principle with a few chosen friends in those days. My father had
required of me to bear testimony of these things at a proper time...

As early as Spring of 1832 Bro Joseph said "Brother Levi, the Lord has
revealed to me that it is his will that righteous men shall take
Righteous women even a plurality of Wives that a Righteous race may be
sent forth uppon the Earth preparatory to the ushering in of the
Millenial Reign of our Redeemer---For the Lord has such a high respect
for the nobles of his kingdom that he is not willing for them to come
through the Loins of a Careles People---Therefore; it behoves those who
embrace the Principle to pay strict attention to even the Least
requirement of our Heavenly Father."

When we examine the details surrounding how Joseph acquired Fanny as a
wife, we can see some interesting patterns in archetypal form emerge
which would come strongly into play in Nauvoo polygamy. Levi Hancock was
the man who supposedly performed the marriage between Joseph and Fanny,
and Joseph apparently made a bargain with Levi, once again from Mosiah's
recounting of the situation. I'm reading this from Todd Compton's book
In Sacred Loneliness; The Plural Wives of Joseph Smith.

"Therefore Brother Joseph said \["\]Brother Levi I want to make a
bargain with you---If you will get Fanny Alger for me for a wife you may
have Clarissa Reed. I love Fanny" "I will" Said Father. "Go brother Levi
and the Lord will prosper you" Said Joseph---Father goes to the father
Samuel Alger---Father's Brother in Law and \[said\] "Samuel\[,\] the
Prophet Joseph loves your Daughter Fanny and wishes her for a wife\[,\]
what say you\[?\]"---Uncle Sam Says---"Go and talk to the Old woman
about it\[,\] twill be as She says" Father goes to his Sister and said
"Clarrissy, Brother Joseph the Prophet of the most high God loves Fanny
and wishes her for a wife what say you" Said She "go and talk to Fanny
it will be all right with me"---Father goes to Fanny and said
"Fanny\[,\] Brother Joseph the Prophet loves you and wishes you for a
wife will you be his wife?" "I will Levi" Said She---Father takes Fanny
to Joseph and said "Brother Joseph I have been successful in my
mission"---Father gave her to Joseph repeating the Ceremony as Joseph
repeated to him."

Compton does a great job in unpacking everything in that account with
this paragraph:

"There is much to comment on in this extraordinary passage. Very
prominent is the theme of exchange of women, which anthropologists have
noted in many cultures. The polygamous marriage proposal is indirect, a
remarkable combination of the romantic and the non-romantic. "I love
Fanny," Smith tells Hancock, yet he does not profess his love to Fanny
face to face. He uses an intermediary, a male relative, to propose to
her. Despite the indirection, this is entirely consistent with Smith's
later method of approaching prospective plural wives in Nauvoo. For
instance, his final proposal to Zina Huntington came through a male
family member, her brother Dimick. Smith also proposed to Almera Johnson
through her brother Benjamin. According to Knight family traditions,
Smith himself brought a proposal from Hyrum Smith to Martha McBride
Knight, Joseph's plural wife at the time, asking for the hand of her
daughter, Almira, for Hyrum...

Levi Hancock received his reward. Smith sanctioned his marriage to
Clarissa Reed, which took place on March 29, 1833, when she was sixteen
and he was twenty-seven."

It's likely that Fanny became pregnant with Joseph's child while living
with the Smiths, which signaled to Emma that Fanny was performing
services beyond just house cleaning for the Prophet. According to
Wilhelm Wyl quoting Chauncy Webb, "Emma was furious, and drove the girl,
who was unable to conceal the consequences of her celestial relation
with the prophet, out of her house." This child was either, aborted,
miscarried, died young, or was raised under another name. Historians are
unable to verify any of those possibilities as documentation surrounding
Fanny's life after 1837 becomes elusive and unreliable.

The circumstances of Fanny's removal from Kirtland should be taken into
consideration. When the public became aware of the sexual relations
between Joseph and Fanny, a number of measures were taken publicly in a
futile effort of damage control. The church leadership issued a
statement dealing with the church's stance on marriage titled "Statement
on Marriage," circa August 1835. The fourth line in the provision is
most interesting for two reasons. First it states that all contracts of
marriage made before a person is baptized should be held sacred and
fulfilled, and second it declares one man can only have one wife and
vice versa.

From Joseph Smith Papers.org

"4 All legal contracts of marriage made before a person
is [baptized](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/statement-on-marriage-circa-august-1835/1#6365021900318059262)
into this church, should be held sacred and fulfilled. Inasmuch as this
church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication, and
polygamy: we declare that we believe, that one man should have one wife;
and one woman, but one husband, except in case of death, when either is
at liberty to marry again. It is not right to persuade a woman to be
baptized contrary to the will of her husband, neither is it lawful to
influence her to leave her husband. All children are bound by law to
obey their parents; and to influence them to embrace any religious
faith, or be baptized, or leave their parents without their consent, is
unlawful and unjust. We believe that all persons who exercise control
over their fellow beings, and prevent them from embracing the truth,
will have to answer for that sin."

Both hard tenets this proposal outlines would be contradicted later by
Joseph Smith and the various church authorities in Nauvoo. Upon the
introduction of polygamy in Nauvoo, Joseph took it upon himself to
nullify all previous marriages, all marriages and sealings would need to
be performed again to be considered valid by church officials. The
second provision had already been violated by Joseph when this was
issued.

After the dirty, nasty, filthy scrape, as Oliver Cowdery called it, with
Fanny was public, arrangements were made for Fanny's removal from town,
but not before a church council was called to get to the bottom of
things. When the council was called, a few of the leadership saw it wise
to lock Fanny up in the tower of the Kirtland temple to ensure her
testimony would be given. Joseph petitioned Levi Hancock to help him out
of the jam because he didn't want Fanny to take the witness stand and
tell the whole church court of their sexual misdeeds.

Few considerations were given for Fanny's emotional state at this time.
She was a mere 19, had become prey for Joseph Smith's insatiable libido,
and was now faced with exile from the community pending the outcome of
her testimony. Locking her in a room while the council very publicly
prepared the church court must have weighed heavily on the young woman's
mind.

From Mosiah Hancock's recounting of a story told to him by his father,
Levi Hancock, I'm reading it from 36 of Compton's In Sacred Loneliness:

"As time progressed the Apostates thought they had a good hold on Joseph
because of Fanny and some of the smart? Ones Confined her in an upper
room of the Temple determined that the Prophet should be settled,
according to their notions. Brother Joseph came to Father and said
"Brother Levi what can be done?"---There being a wagon and a dry goods
Box close by and Joseph being strong and Father active\[,\] Father soon
gained the window sill and Fanny was soon on the ground\[.\] Father
mounts his horse with Fanny behind him and altho dark they were in New
Lyme forty five miles distant---And when the worthies? Sent Fannys
dinner the next day they were astonished not to be able to find
her---Father by that time had returned and his animal was in the
Stable."

This may be just family tradition, folklore, if you will. Regardless of
whether or not Fanny was actually locked in the temple for a few days so
the brethren could hear her testimony and Joseph told Levi Hancock to
bust her out, it does represent an interesting shift in Joseph's
perspective about how the public would view his liberal stance on
marriage and love. He was the Prophet, but he knew there were boundaries
he could cross ineloquently that the brethren wouldn't accept and the
public would decry. Moving forward, Joseph would have to be much more
careful about his relationships and approach things at a more systematic
level instead of just having a fling and justifying it as righteous
polygamy afterwards.

Joseph's next documentable relationship was with a woman who had a
complicated and storied past, Lucinda Pendleton Morgan. Lucinda was the
widow of a man named William Morgan. William Morgan had become a member
of a Masonic lodge in New York in an effort to expose the secret masonic
ceremonies. He ascended the three degrees over a number of years, and
finally wrote his expose to be published in 1826. When word got out that
he'd written the booklet and sent it to the printers for publishing, a
group of Masons kidnapped him and likely killed him, which fueled the
anti-Masonic fervor of the late 1820s. This was also during Andrew
Jackson's heated presidential campaign, and he was a Mason as well, so
the public perception of Masons was quickly degrading to viewing them as
a clandestine mafia or something. The printer published the book with a
strong forward about the death of William Morgan in the following year
of 1827, which revitalized the anti-masonic tensions in the burned-over
district and all of New England, casting Lucinda Pendleton Morgan into
the public spotlight again.

After William's death, Lucinda married a friend of the family, George
Washington Harris, and they both converted to Mormonism around October
or November 1834. George W. Harris quickly climbed the ranks to being a
trusted Mormon elite and by early 1838 he and Lucinda were living in
Missouri set to receive the prophet and Sidney Rigdon after their
midnight flight from Kirtland. From pg 49 of Compton's In Sacred
Loneliness:

"The Saints in Zion organized to give their prophet a proper welcome. On
February 24, George W. Harris, Edward Partridge, and Isaac Morley were
appointed to meet Smith and Sidney Rigdon with wagons and financial aid,
and when Joseph and Emma arrived at Far West on March 14, Smith wrote:
'We were immediately received under the hospitable roof of George W.
Harris who treated us with all kindness possible. Here we refreshed
ourselves with much satisfaction after our long and tedious journey.'
They stayed with the Harrises for some two months, then moved to their
own house.

There is no firm date for Smith's marriage to Lucinda, but these two
months are a good possibility. He often married women while he was
living in the same house with them, and the Sarah Pratt statement
correlates with the year 1838, as well. Smith was thirty-two at the time
and Lucinda was thirty-six, so he was the first of her husbands who was
not an older man. George Harris may have given permission for the
marriage, since he was a close friend of Smith and a church leader. He
later stood proxy for Smith in the Nauvoo temple as his wife was sealed
to the dead prophet for eternity. Despite the prophet's connection to
Lucinda, she would not stop living with George, as was customary in
Smith's polyandrous marriages."

A lot of mystery surrounds Joseph and Lucinda Pendleton's relationship,
which has been later called a marriage. Joseph had learned from the
public outcry with the Fanny incident which was one of many factors that
removed him from Kirtland and forced the church to move to Missouri; he
needed to keep his relations with women other than Emma secretive. This
marks a significant issue with any relations Joseph may have had before
and after Lucinda prior to 1841. The public outcry was enough to get
Joseph chased from town from just one rumor. Seeing this tenor of his
relationships really makes a person wonder what intimacy Joseph had that
can't and never will be documented.

This is a recurring issue with so many of these polygamous relations.
Prior to celestial marriages being documented in 1841, Joseph didn't
exactly include passages in his journal of his various affairs prior to
polygamy being accepted practice among the elites. We don't see entries
so blatant as to say something like, "Went to Hiram, Ohio, bedded
Marinda Nancy Johnson, mob took me out of house and tarred and feathered
me." Historians wouldn't expect to find information such as this written
down. Documenting every woman Joseph ever had any relationship with,
even non-sexual, becomes a challenging exercise with which hundreds of
historians have wrestled for over a century.

The Fellowcraft

Why don't we take this opportunity to discuss Hiram, Ohio and Marinda
Nancy Johnson for a minute? When Joseph first moved to Ohio, he began
living on the Isaac Morley farm for a brief stint. After that, around
late 1831, he moved to the Johnson home a few miles from Kirtland in
Hiram. He and Emma spent a couple of years living in one of the bedrooms
of this mansion, even by modern standards.

Joseph and Rigdon were translating the Bible at this time during dozens
of séance-like sessions with a number of the brethren. In what Mormon
apologists will claim was response to this blasphemy, an anti-Joseph mob
formed and dragged Joseph and Rigdon from their homes, beat them, and
tarred and feathered them. Among the details often lost is the fact that
the mob wanted to remove Joseph's testicles, hardly explicable with the
reasoning of the mob angry about him and Rigdon rewriting the Bible.
From 231 of Todd Compton's book:

"Marinda described the event:

'A mob, disguising themselves as black men, gathered and burst into his
\[Joseph's\] sleeping apartment one night, and dragged him from the bed
where he was nursing a sick child. They also went to the house of Elder
Rigdon, and took him out with Joseph into an orchard, where, after
choking and beating them, they tarred and feathered them, and left them
nearly dead...'

According to Luke Johnson, Smith was stretched on a board, then 'they
tore off the few night clothes that he had on, for the purpose of
emasculating him, and had Dr. Dennison there to perform the operation.
But when the Dr. saw the prophet stripped and stretched on the plan, his
heart failed him, and he refused to operate.'

The motivation for this mobbing has been debated. Clark Braden, a late,
antagonistic, secondhand witness, alleged in a polemic public debate
that Marinda's brother Eli led a mob against Smith because the prophet
had been too intimate with Marinda \[aged 16\]. This tradition suggests
that Smith may have married Marinda at this early time, and some
circumstantial factors support such a possibility. The castration
attempt might be taken as evidence that the mob felt that Joseph had
committed a sexual impropriety; since the attempt is reported by Luke
Johnson, there is no good reason to doubt it. Also, they had planned the
operation in advance, as they brought along a doctor to perform it. The
first revelations on polygamy had been received in 1831, by historian
Daniel Bachman's dating. Also, Joseph Smith did tend to marry women who
had stayed at his house or in whose house he had stayed."

Compton goes on to discuss alternate theories to explain the mobbing and
the problems with Clark Braden's secondhand account, but I find this
explanation for the castration attempt to be sound reasoning and we can
leave it there. It should be noted that Marinda would later marry Orson
Hyde, and Joseph would marry her in Nauvoo while Hyde was on his mission
to Israel in 1841-3.

Joseph having relations with teenagers before the legal age of consent
seems to be a recurring theme, Ephebophilia. Another example of his
magnetism and appeal to and for younger women is captured in another of
Joseph's wives-to-be when he met her in Kirtland, Mary Elizabeth
Rollins. The Rollins family attended the first preaching meetings in
Kirtland by Oliver Cowdery and his ilk as they were making their way for
Missouri. The Mormon preachers thoroughly enticed the Rollins family and
Mary specifically who was 12 years old at the time. They were baptized
by Parley P. Pratt after Mary had borrowed Isaac Morley's copy of the
Book of Mormon and was captivated by its words. Once Joseph made his way
to Kirtland in very early 1831, he met the Morleys and everybody living
nearby or on the Morley farm, Mary was one of the people in attendance
and her record survives of the first time she met Joseph Smith.

From Compton's In Sacred Loneliness beginning page 207:

"Later, in early February 1831, Joseph Smith moved to Kirtland and
visited the Gilbert home where he was surprised to see the copy of the
Book of Mormon, still rare in Ohio. Newell Whitney told him the story of
Mary's intense desire to read it, and Smith asked to meet this young
woman. Mary wrote, 'I was sent for; when he saw me, he looked at me so
earnestly, I felt almost afraid \[and I thought, 'He can read my every
thought,' and I thought how blue his eyes were.\] after a moment, or too
he came and put his hands on my head and gave me a great Blessing, (the
first I ever received) and made me a present of the Book.'

A few evenings later she visited the Smith house with her mother and
attended a meeting Joseph had organized. Mary sat on a plank resting on
boxes. After prayer and singing, Smith talked, then suddenly stopped:

'And his countenance Shone, and seemed almost transparent---it seems as
though the solemnity of Eternity rested upon all of us...\[He\] seemed
almost transfixed, he was looking ahead and his face outshone the candle
which was on a shelf just behind him. I thought I could almost see the
cheek bones, he looked as though a searchlight was inside his face and
shining through every pore. I could not take my eyes from his face...'

Later she reported that Smith's words and appearance at this time were
"photographed" on her brain. She regarded this as the first time she was
"sealed" to the Mormon Prophet ..., though she was "sealed up to eternal
life" by being "given" to Smith, their advocate with Jesus, along
\[with\] the rest of the small congregation. Only later would "seal"
come to mean "Marry" or "link" in Mormon theology."

Mary was still 12 years old at this time. It should be noted that during
many of these meetings on the Morley farm, they partook of the sacrament
in their various religious ceremonies among singing and praying. If the
Smith-entheogen theory holds and Joseph was spiking the sacrament with
psychoactives, this was when Joseph was still tuning in the dose, set,
and setting for the perfect spiritual experience. It's understandable
that this 12-year-old girl's first experience with a charismatic
spiritual leader like Joseph while everybody was hopped up on entheogens
was a memorable experience for her, explaining why it was "photographed"
on her mind from such an early age. During that same meeting, Martin
Harris was groveling on the floor at the feet of the prophet when Joseph
told everybody the savior had been walking among them and Joseph had
communed face to face with Jesus. Powerful assertions, but everybody in
the room was feeling the spirit and likely in a highly suggestible state
of mind, and the pale countenance of the prophet was likely just as
vivid for most of the people in the room. This experience is perfectly
consistent with what we would expect of "consecrated" sacrament.

What Mary Elizabeth Rollins accounts do for historians, is document a
trend in Joseph's sexual practices. From the time they first met, Mary
held a certain reverence and affinity for the prophet and it seems he
was drawn to her in her early pubescent phase. As she matured into
womanhood, Joseph would seem to never take his eyes off her, which
really seems to strike some predatory tones. Joseph would later tell
Mary that he was commanded in 1834 to take her as his wife, but couldn't
as she was living in Missouri a thousand miles from Kirtland. She soon
married a young man aged 25 when she was 17, named Adam Lightner, a
non-Mormon from Pennsylvania. Mary continued to keep the idea of being
married to the prophet in her mind, and finally in early 1842, he
proposed to take her as his polygamous wife.

From 211 of Compton's book:

"By Mary's own account, she had had spiritual presentiments that she
would become Joseph Smith's wife: 'I had been dreaming for a number of
years I was his wife. I thought I was a great sinner. I prayed to God to
take it from me.' However, the prophetic dreams were fulfilled---Smith
proposed to her in early February 1842 at the home of Newel and
Elizabeth Whitney. In her later life she retold the story a number of
times, which allows us to construct a fascinating, detailed composite
account showing how Smith approached his prospective wives. First, after
he introduced the idea of plural marriage to Mary, he told her that God
had instructed him to marry her in 1834, but he had been in Kirtland and
she in Missouri. He said that he had been frightened of the idea at
first, but, he said, as Mary remembered it, 'The angel came to me three
times between the year of '34 and '42 and said I was to obey that
principle or he would lay \[destroy\] me.'

Then he made an important statement: 'Joseph said I was his before I
came here and he said all the Devils in hell should never get me from
him.' In her autobiography Mary wrote that Smith told her, 'I was
created for him before the foundation of the Earth was laid.' So we have
the doctrine of spirits matched in the pre-existence, a concept that
gives important insight into Smith's practice of polyandry. It fits him
into the context of the broader 'spiritual wife' doctrine in the
Burned-over District, in which spiritual affinities between a man and
woman took precedence over legal but nonsacral marriage. Perhaps the
Mormon doctrine of the pre-existence derived in part from this
influence.

Smith also told Mary, 'I know that I shall be saved in the Kingdom of
God. I have the oath of God upon it and God cannot lie. All that he
gives me I shall take with me for I have that authority and that power
conferred upon me.' In other words, Smith linked plural marriage with
salvation, as he did in later marriages. If Mary accepted him as her
husband, her place in heaven would be assured."

There are a few interesting patterns to tease out of Joseph's
relationship with Mary. First off, he'd primed her to be open to the
concept of plural marriage during her formative teenage years. He'd told
her while in Nauvoo that he'd been commanded by an angel to take her to
wife years before he had the courage to approach her, which coincided
closely with when they first met. One skill Joseph had acquired
throughout his early years was the ability to read people through body
language and simple mannerisms. From the way Mary's recounting is
structured, it seems like she was attracted to Joseph from the time she
was coming in to early womanhood, likely giving subconscious body
language signals, upon which Joseph was capable of picking up and
capitalizing.

Once Joseph decided to pursue Mary with a bit more earnest, he
fabricated the claim that she was his in the pre-existence before they
came to earth; she was made for him. This likely gave spiritual
explanation for the chemistry they shared and made her more open-minded
to the prospect of continuing to be married to Adam Lightner, while
being sealed to the Prophet for eternity where marriage really mattered.

Finally, the cherry on top, Joseph told her that any woman who marries
him, her place in heaven would be assured. The reason people follow a
prophet is to gain eternal salvation. When that prophet provides a
direct path through marriage to him, that's a hard bargain to ignore,
even if the requirement comes into conflict with Victorian era
Puritanical views on sexuality and marriage.

Mary toiled with the proposition for some time.

From later in Compton's book:

"She did not agree to the marriage at first---she was married to and
presumably in love with another man, and was skeptical of Smith's
doctrine. She asked why, if an angel came to him, it had not appeared to
her? She asked pointedly, wasn't it possible that the angel was from the
devil? Smith assured her that it had come from God. She replied that she
would never be sealed to him until she had a direct witness from God. He
told her to pray earnestly, for the angel had told him that she would
have a witness. As the conversation ended, he asked her if she would
turn traitor and speak of this to anyone. She replied, "I shall never
tell a mortal I had such a talk from a married man!"

She was understandably troubled by this proposal. Nevertheless, she
prayed about it and discussed it with the only person Smith would allow
her to confide in, Brigham Young. One day she knelt between three
haystacks, and, she wrote, 'If ever a poor mortal prayed I did.' She
even prayed with her hands upraised, following the pattern of Moses. A
few nights after that she was in her bedroom where her mother and aunt
slept also, when, she later recounted, 'a Personage stood in front of
the Bed looking at me. Its clothes were whiter than anything I had ever
seen, I could look at its Person, but when I saw its face so bright, and
more beautiful than any Earthly being Could be, and those eyes pearcing
me through, and through, I could not endure it, it seemed as if I must
die with fear, I fell back in Bed and Covered up my head.' As she hid
under her covers, her aunt awoke and saw 'a figure in white robes pass
from our bed to my mother's bed and pass out of the window.'"

Let's take a second to discuss Joseph and Mary's relationship. Joseph
had picked up signals that Mary could be one of his victims for years by
this point. He told her that he'd been commanded by an angel to marry
her and that if she were righteous enough she would gain the same
confirmation. She was under a lot of stress with this proposition and
maybe other things which were going on in her life, and after days of
contemplating and toiling over Joseph's proposition, she finally had a
psychological break and her mind constructed what she wanted most while
she was in a sleep-deprived and drowsy state of mind. She would later
approach Joseph with this story and he would claim it as the
confirmation she sought and supposedly prophesied other things which
would befall Mary's family, which she claims all came true.

After years of grooming this impressionable teenage woman, and a few
weeks of intense pursuit and constant bombardment of sexual advances,
Joseph finally collected his prize and Mary was married to Joseph at the
end of February 1842.

Of Joseph's many wives, examples like what Mary experienced exhibit what
can easily be classified as sexual predation. The term sexual grooming
is very loaded and holds significant weight and explanatory power. I
found an article on allure which discusses the allegations of sexual
abuse perpetrated by music artist R. Kelly, but it also exhibits some
incredibly relevant information about the process behind grooming. The
article cites clinical and forensic sexologist Eric Marlowe Garrison
who's made sexual grooming one of his main focuses of study. You'll find
a link to the article in the show notes.

"Grooming is the slow, methodical, and intentional process of
manipulating a person to a point where they can be victimized," [Eric
Marlowe Garrison](http://www.ericmgarrison.com/), a sex counselor and
author, tells *Allure.*"After \[the perpetrators\] find their targets,
they then gain trust and move in from there."

A few relevant extracts from the article which lists 7 details of sexual
grooming people should know about.

1.  Anyone can be a victim:

No one is immune to grooming, though some are more susceptible than
others --- including minors, \"because of their naiveté," Marlowe
Garrison says. "\[Grooming\] can occur at any age, and it has a great
deal to do with gullibility, insecurity, religion, and culture. \[\...\]
It starts by targeting a vulnerable person, then building trust.

> **2. It often starts with friendship.**
>
> Groomers don't jump right into abuse, which is often sexual; they
> begin with building a friendship. "It'll be in a way where they get to
> know the \[victim\] well enough where they find out what they
> like," [Dawn Michael](http://thehappyspouse.com/), PhD, a sexuality
> counselor, tells *Allure.* "Let's say somebody is on Snapchat
> or\...Instagram --- \[the offender\] can pick up some of the things
> that \[the victim\] is posting. That's why, especially for young teens
> or even young adults, they have to be aware of the information they're
> putting out there, because someone can get this information and use it
> to befriend them; and that's kind of how it starts."
>
> 3\. Perpetrators use favors and promises to build trust.
>
> Initial friendliness typically encourages the victim to let down their
> guard and think of the perpetrator as a mentor, benefactor, romantic
> interest, or friend. And then, "once \[the victim\'s\] guard is down,
> the \[perpetrator\] will do them a favor," Michael says. "They'll do
> something for \[the victim\] so that the person feels indebted to them
> to a certain extent."

4\. Secrecy is a common characteristic of grooming.

Typically, groomers try to keep relationships with victims extremely
private from the very beginning, Marlowe Garrison says. "Secrecy is
developed early on for non-sexual aspects of the relationships," he
says. In his beach glass example, for instance, he says the groomer
might say, "Let's not tell anyone where you got the beach glass, because
I only have but so much. If others find out about it, there won't be any
left for your growing collection!" Excuses for keeping interactions
private can make victims feel flattered and special, and therefore
inclined to keep these interactions secret.

5\. Grooming can be difficult to distinguish from romance.

The slow process of building trust and establishing secrecy as normal
can make it hard for both victims and victims\' acquaintances to
recognize grooming for what it is. If you feel you may be that victim,
or that someone you know is, "one thing to look out for is \[an\]
insistence to meet" on the part of the groomer, Marlowe Garrison says.
"Groomers are spending a lot of time and money on building that
relationship, and they can see their progress \[through meetings\]."
Groomers\' desire to see their victim exceeds the excitement that might
be expected of someone in a new romantic relationship and crosses over
into guilting and threats.

6\. Victims can get out.

**7. Family members and friends can help, but it's important for them to
tread carefully."**

The entire article is fascinating, so please chase the show notes and
give it a read, but let's examine the high points of Mary and Joseph's
relationship to see if we can check any of those boxes.

1.  Minors are specifically susceptible to grooming due to their
    > naivete. Mary was 12 and Joseph was 26 when they first met and
    > their relationship developed from there.

2.  It all started with friendship. Joseph didn't propose to her when he
    > first met Mary, he paid his dues to become her friend over more
    > than a decade before he proposed, exhibiting that Joseph was in it
    > for the long haul.

3.  Using promises and favors to build trust. The very first thing
    > Joseph did was give a Book of Mormon to Mary when she felt she
    > wasn't worthy to have her own copy. What started as an indirect
    > gift, Mary likely saw as a great favor to her from a prophet of
    > God, an authority figure, a gift which was her ticket to eternal
    > salvation. What greater gift can a person give than salvation,
    > which also came into play when Joseph promised her that his wives
    > would have their seat reserved in the celestial kingdom.

4.  Secrecy. Obviously, Joseph swore Mary to secrecy and she was only
    > able to speak to Brigham Young, Joseph's wingman, about the
    > proposition. Keeping his proposition secret was necessary for so
    > many obvious reasons, which Mary seemed to uphold.

5.  Grooming is difficult to distinguish from romance. Joseph's claims
    > to divinity were hard to distinguish from reality when the
    > majority of the people around him hung on to every word which
    > spewed from his mouth as if it came straight from the mouth of
    > God. Any subconscious grooming Joseph was putting Mary through had
    > the veneer of divinity, even though it could likely be ascribed to
    > sexual predation when we look back at all the details.

6.  Victims can get out. This may have been true for Mary, had she ever
    > realized Joseph's real intentions and her status as a victim of
    > grooming. Instead, she became the widow of an unwilling martyr
    > before she came of any reasonable age to discover whether or not
    > she was deceived. Joseph was immortalized as her ticket to
    > exaltation, and I doubt she ever put extra thought into whether or
    > not she had been a victim of primal sexual predation.

All in all, the example of Mary Rollins' relationship to Joseph ticks
every one of the boxes linked to signs of sexual grooming, a powerful,
yet subtle, sexual predatory practice. Where this becomes increasingly
more insidious is when we examine number 7 on the list, Family members
and friends can help, but it's important for them to tread carefully.
Nauvoo was utterly spellbound to Joseph Smith as their pipeline to
divinity. When anybody identified his sexual indiscretions and predatory
abuse, they were quickly cut off from the society or treated as lesser
to some extent. William Marks and Sidney Rigdon provide great examples
of what happened when members of the elite were opposed to polygamy. One
was nearly assassinated; the other was essentially cut off from church
affairs and begrudged by Joseph for the rest of his life. Such were the
consequences of trusted elites when they opposed polygamy, what would
happen if Adam Lightner, the non-Mormon husband of Mary, would have
spoken up about what was going on? Even if he didn't speak publicly
about it, how would that conversation go with his wife in private? He
may have approached her and said that he was suspicious of Joseph Smith
and didn't agree with the relationship situation, but would Mary be
willing to listen, or would her damaged psyche from years of grooming
and some mix of divine Stockholm syndrome cause her to oppose any
rational conversation on the subject?

The way we introduced this conversation today is by proposing some
labels that fit Joseph Smith's sexual profile. Of his dozens of wives,
many examples can be cherry-picked to exhibit every label we proposed,
and this example with Mary fits the bill of Joseph Smith being a
practiced sexual predator, trending towards serial ephebophilia.

Look, I'm all for informed consenting adults engaging in whatever sexual
or relationship situation or practice which makes them happy. If you
tried to pin Mary down on her relationship with Joseph, she may very
well claim she was fully informed in the situation and she was making
the decision of her own free-will, but parsing truly informed and actual
consent out of a one-sided sexual relationship that was the product of
years of grooming and sexual predation isn't a simple task, but it
definitely doesn't fit the criteria of informed and consensual. For many
of his polygamous relationships, Joseph Smith was a sexual predator,
there's no way to get around that fact. It's not fake news, it's not
anti-Mormon propaganda, it's not cherry-picking facts to substantiate a
false claim, Joseph Smith preyed on unsuspecting young women at
impressionable times in their lives. Any court would look at this
verifiable historical evidence and convict Joseph Smith for sex abuse
and today he would be a registered sex offender. That's the real human
being behind who Mormons claim to be their Prophet of God.

Consistent with Joseph's sexual predation was another one of his wives,
the youngest of all he married. From the Plural Marriage in Kirtland and
Nauvoo article on lds.org:

"Most of those sealed to Joseph Smith were between 20 and 40 years of
age at the time of their sealing to him. The oldest, Fanny Young, was 56
years old. The youngest was Helen Mar Kimball, daughter of Joseph's
close friends Heber C. and Vilate Murray Kimball, who was sealed to
Joseph several months before her 15th birthday. Marriage at such an age,
inappropriate by today's standards, was legal in that era, and some
women married in their mid-teens. Helen Mar Kimball spoke of her sealing
to Joseph as being "for eternity alone," suggesting that the
relationship did not involve sexual relations."

Historians have taken issue with the wording in much of this gospel
topics essay, not least of which is the wording surrounding Helen Mar
Kimball marrying Joseph "several months before her 15^th^ birthday".
Guys, she was 14, just tell it how it is, 7 months shy of 15 is actually
closer to 14 than it is to 15. Another issue with the LDS.org essay is
that it seems to paint a picture that teen marriages were common
practice in the early to mid-1800s, which isn't true. The average age
for marriage was 22 for women and 21 for men throughout most of the
19^th^ century. Teen marriages weren't forbidden, but they certainly
weren't average by any stretch of imagination. It should have said
"Marriage at such an age, inappropriate by today and 19^th^-century
standards, was legal in that era". Another point to take issue with,
Helen Kimball called her marriage to Joseph as "for eternity alone".
Church historians have taken this as a keyword exhibiting that she
wasn't sexually involved and that the marriage was only performed for
the sake of sealing Helen to Joseph in the eternities. I think this is
an EXTREMELY generous interpretation and doesn't explain why so much of
Helen's decision to marry Joseph was so heavily laden with nothing but
dread and loathing. However, Joseph did die before she was 16, so he may
have kept his hands off her, there's no way to know.

Luckily for historians, Helen Kimball was a prolific writer and
autobiographer. She frequently kept journals and, in spite of her
fundamental disagreements with the practice of polygamy, she would later
become a public advocate for its legal practice in Utah, publishing 2
pamphlets in the 1880s defending it. Helen is one of the better
documented examples of Joseph's polygamy.

Without going through the entirety of Helen Kimball's relationship with
Joseph, suffice it to say, she wasn't so ecstatic about it. Joseph
initially propositioned Vilate and Heber Kimball to take Vilate as one
of his wives, to which the Kimballs reluctantly agreed. When Heber and
Vilate approached the prophet and agreed to the marriage, Joseph said it
was merely a test and they passed so he wouldn't take Vilate for a wife.
Instead, he wanted their 14-year-old daughter, Helen for a wife. As we
progress through our timeline, when this interaction happens between
Joseph and the Kimballs, we'll discuss it, but for now the conversation
can function by understanding that Helen is yet one more example of
Joseph Smith's sexual prey, regardless of whether or not they actually
shared intimacy.

One aspect of polygamy in Nauvoo we can't ignore is how much it
permeated the top echelons of Mormon leadership. Gone were the days of
Kirtland and Missouri polygamy where Joseph was going at it with
cavalier disregard for the destruction left in his wake, he needed other
trusted people in leadership positions on his side for the doctrine to
be accepted and widely practiced at a systemic level. Brigham Young and
Heber Kimball were some of Joseph's greatest allies and wingmen when it
came to acquiring more wives. Joseph was happy to return the favor when
situations would arise.

There was a family of recent European immigrant converts when Brigham
wanted to take the 17-year-old Martha Brotherton for his wife. Brigham
had converted the Brotherton family during his mission in Europe over
1840-42 and had undoubtedly cultivated an attraction to young Martha
during his time there. She was unsuspectingly ambushed by the three
molesketeers: Joseph Smith, Heber Kimball, and Brigham Young in the
upper story of the Red Brick Store. They locked Martha in a room with
Brigham and later brought in Joseph to drive the marriage proposition
home. Martha refused and subsequently went home and recorded the
incident which was included as an affidavit in John C. Bennett's expose
of polygamy. I'll let you, the listener, judge everything about this
scenario for yourself.

H. Michael Marquardt painstakingly reconstructed the interactions in his
book Rise of Mormonism, from which I'm reading this beginning on page
563:

"Going upstairs with Heber C. Kimball to the second floor of the Red
Brick Store she \[Martha\] found Brigham Young and Joseph Smith alone.
Martha was introduced to the Prophet Joseph Smith by Brigham Young.
Joseph offered Martha his seat after which Smith and Heber Kimball left
the room leaving Martha alone with Apostle Young. Brigham Young arose,
locked the door, closed the window, and drew the curtain. He then came
and sat before Martha Brotherton. The following is based on her memory
of what took place that day:

B: This is our private Room, Martha.

M: Indeed, sir, I must be highly honored to be permitted to enter it.

B: Sister Martha, I want to ask you a few questions; will you answer
them?

M: Yes, sir.

B: And will you promise not to mention them to anyone?

M: If it is your desire, sir, I will not.

B: And you will not think any the worse of me for it, will you, Martha?

M: No sire.

B: Well, what are your feelings toward me?

M: My feelings are just the same towards you that they ever were, sir.

B: But, to come to the point more closely, have not you an affection for
me, that, were it lawful and right, you could accept of me for your
husband and companion?

M: If it was lawful and right perhaps I might; but you know, sir, it is
not.

B: Well, brother Joseph has had a revelation from God that it is lawful
and right for a man to have two wives; for as it was in the days of
Abraham, so it shall be in these last days, and whoever is the first
that is willing to take up the cross will receive the greatest
blessings; and if you will accept of me I will take you straight to the
celestial kingdom; and if you will have me in this world, I will have
you in that which is to come, and brother Joseph will marry us here
today, and you can go home this evening, and your parents will not know
anything about it.

M: Sir, I should not like to do anything of the kind without the
permission of my parents.

B: Well, you are of age, are you not?

M: No, sir, I shall not be until the 24^th^ of May.

B: Well, that does not make any difference. You will be of age before
they know, and you need not fear. If you will take my counsel it will be
well with you, for I know it to be right before God, and if there is any
sin in it, I will answer for it. But brother Joseph wishes to have some
talk with you on the subject, he will explain things, will you hear him?

M: I do not mind.

B: Well, I want you to say something.

M: I want time to think about it.

B: Well, I will have a kiss any how."

After that Brigham brought Joseph in as the wingman to seal the deal.

"B2J: Well, sister Martha would be willing if she knew it was lawful and
right before God.

J: Well, Martha, it is lawful and right before God. I know it is. Look
here, don't you believe in me? Well Martha, just go ahead and do as
Brigham wants you to, he is the best man in the world except me.

B: Oh then you are as good.

J: Yes.

B: Well, we believe Joseph to be a Prophet. I have known him near eight
years, and always found him the same.

J: Yes, and I know that this is lawful and right before God; and if
there is any sin in it I will answer for it before God, and I have the
keys of the kingdom, and whatever I bind on earth is bound in heaven,
and whatever I loose on earth is loosed in heaven; and if you will
accept of Brigham, you shall be blessed. God shall bless you, and my
blessing shall rest upon you, and if you will be led by him you will do
well; for I know Brigham will take care of you, and if he don't do his
duty to you, come to me and I will make him; and if you do not like it
in a month or two, come to me and I will make you free again; and if he
turns you off I will take you on.

M: Sir, it will be too late to think in a month or two after. I want
time to think first.

J: Well, the old proverb is "Nothing ventured, nothing gained;" And it
would be the greatest blessing that was ever bestowed upon you.

B: Yes, and you will never have reason to repent it, that is, if I do
not turn from righteousness, and that I trust I never shall, for I
believe God who has kept me so long will continue to keep me faithful.
Did you ever see me act in any way wrong in England, Martha?

M: No, sir.

B: No, neither can any one else lay any thing to my charge.

J: Well, then, what are you afraid of? Come let me do the business for
you.

M: Sir, do let me have a little time to think about it, and I will
promise not to mention it to any one.

B: Well, look here, you know a fellow will never be damned for doing the
best he knows how.

M: Well, then, the best way I know of, is to go home and think and pray
about it.

B: Well, I shall leave it with brother Joseph, whether it would be best
for you to have time or not.

J: Well, I see no harm in her having time to think, if she will not fall
into temptation.

M: O, sir, there is no fear of my falling into temptation.

B: Well, you must promise me you will never mention it to any one.

M: I do promise it.

J: Well, you must promise me the same.

M: I promise.

J: Well, that will do, that is the principle we go upon. I think I can
trust you, Martha.

M: Yes, I think you ought.

J: She looks as if she could keep a secret."

I find that whole situation profoundly uncomfortable and disturbing,
I'll let you judge it and the people who put Martha in that situation
for yourself.

To claim all of Joseph's polygamist relations were the product of his
sexual predation would be wholly inaccurate. We can paint a picture of
Joseph as a sexual predator with a number of examples, but other
examples exist among Joseph's harem that exhibit women who seemed
informed and consensual in practicing free-love with the Prophet and
merely calling it marriage for the sake of public perceptions.

Truly, one of Joseph's most fascinating wives was Eliza R. Snow, sister
of the 4^th^ prophet of the Brighamite church. Eliza was a poet born in
1804, and stands heads and shoulders above her contemporaries as being
incredibly bright and witty. She was also a powerful feminist and
female's ally in Nauvoo and especially Utah, was made the first
secretary of the 1842 Relief Society, and would go on to have a very
colorful life in various leadership positions throughout Utah, even
dabbling in politics from time to time.

She didn't seem particularly interested in having a relationship during
her early womanhood. From page 308 of Compton's book in Chapter 13 all
about Eliza Roxcy Snow:

"Her later friend, Patty Sessions, married when she was seventeen, but
Eliza, despite many opportunities for romance, remained single. Perhaps
potential suitors were intimidated by her educated, strong-minded
intelligence. Wells wrote, 'Many of her friends were extremely anxious
to see her well settled in life, but she was happy in herself and would
not submit to any interference in this matter.' She stands apart from
nearly all of Joseph Smith's wives in this respect, as she might have
been a spinster if Smith had not married her. And despite her marriages
to Smith and Brigham Young, she raised no children."

Another example Compton includes of Eliza's intelligence was during the
Snow family's exodus from Missouri to Illinois in December 1838 when
Eliza was confronted by a member of the Missouri state militia
overseeing the Mormon exodus.

"The Snows, with a company of seventy-five, left Adam-ondi-Ahman on
December 10 in the bitter cold of winter. As they traveled, Eliza had an
encounter with 'one of the so-called Militia' that gives us an example
of her sharp, ironic wit. He greeted her: 'Well, I think this will cure
you of your faith. Looking him squarely in the eye, I replied, 'No, Sir,
it will take more than this to cure me of my faith.' His countenance
dropped and he responded, 'I must confess you are a better soldier than
I am.' I passed on, thinking that, unless he was above the average of
his fellows in that section, I was not complimented by his confession."

When Eliza first heard rumors of polygamy, she claimed it was a
revulsive concept to her, but once she was introduced, she really
started liking the lifestyle and how much it plugged her into the elite
Mormon society. From 312 of Compton's In Sacred Loneliness, I think this
paragraph drives home the point that not all of Joseph's wives were
averse to the new doctrine or were acquired through means of sexual
predation.

"But Eliza's conversion \[to the practice of polygamy\] would go one
step further: 'As I increased in knowledge concerning the principle and
design of Plural Marriage, I grew in love with it, and to-day esteem it
a precious, sacred principle---necessary in the elevation and salvation
of the human family---in redeeming women from the curse, and the world
from corruption.'"

Eliza would later say in an interview that Emma authorized the marriage
and that Eliza and Joseph's relationship had a sexual dimension. For the
sake of brevity, Eliza's story is one that needs to be unpacked, but we
won't take the opportunity to do so today. Instead, I'm hoping to have a
guest on to discuss Eliza in the future. For now, we can rest assured
that Eliza was a proponent of polygamy once she was fully introduced to
the concept, and would later be used as an emissary for Joseph Smith to
proposition other prospective wives.

That's one salacious aspect to point out, Joseph did convince some of
his wives to manipulate other women that he wanted to take as wives.
Even Eliza was first introduced to the practice of polygamy by Sarah
Cleveland, who was Joseph's wife at the time, who told Eliza all about
it while they were roommates. But there are plenty of other instances
where one or two of Joseph's wives would ambush and manipulate a young
woman he wanted as another wife in order to convince her that everything
would be alright once she took the Prophet's hand in celestial marriage.

The Master

We can't possibly cover the lives and stories of over 30 women in a
single sitting and say everything that needs to be said. We've only just
scratched the surface and skimmed over the highlights of a few of
Joseph's wives in our examination today. As our timeline matures through
Nauvoo, we'll continue to highlight polygamy in all its forms as it was
practiced by the select Mormon elites.

The sense of clandestine privilege many of these women enjoyed was but
one more tool Joseph would utilize to his benefit. An account published
right after the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum in Carthage, written
by one Joseph Jackson details how Joseph Smith may have used his trusted
women to get some dirty work done.

You'll find a link to Jackson's entire expose in the show notes:

"The conversation then turned on other subjects, and Joe boasted of his
feats and schemes, and how cunningly he had carried his measures. He
spoke of his spiritual wives particularly, and called them \"great
captains,\" in his service to carry his design, and remarked that
through them he could get any stranger\'s money. I asked him how he
would work the matter; to which he replied, that he had only to tell
certain of his spiritual wives, that such a man had been in the Missouri
war, and that he should be put out of the way, and his properly and
money consecrated to the use, of the church; then said he, it is d\--d
easy for them to got into his good graces, and to mix a white powder
with his victuals, and put him out of the \'way. I then told him that he
ought to give me the names of these women, as they might be of great
service to me in carrying his secret measures. He then went on to give
me the names of women, who he said would go to the ends of the earth for
him; but I shall not in this place disclose them."

It should be noted that the Nauvoo expositor corroborated Jackson's
writings published in the Warsaw signal prior to this being published,
but there may not be any way to corroborate Joseph getting some of his
wives to sleep with men and poison their drinks when he wanted them put
out of the way. It's more food for thought than anything else, but
should it hold true, I find it paints a very different picture of Joseph
Smith from being that of a pious religious leader seeking to do God's
will to that of a mafia boss with very little scruples about the means
he would employ to achieve an end.

One resounding question Mormon historians have been toiling with for so
long is where does Emma fit into all of this. I find three possibilities
and the truth probably falls somewhere between the cracks left by these
three. 1. Emma had no idea Joseph was practicing polygamy and was
ignorant of it until the day she died, giving a generous reading to her
death-bed interview. 2. Emma knew that Joseph was practicing polygamy,
but didn't like it and didn't know the extent to which he was
practicing. This leaves her death-bed interview as basically a denial,
where she willfully lied about her past. Finally 3. Emma knew full well
the extent Joseph was practicing polygamy, was similarly opinioned of
free-love as her husband, and her death-bed denial of polygamy was
merely to save face in the late Victorian era where sexuality was a
starkly taboo topic of discussion.

There are ways to interpret the historical record which could
substantiate all of these possible interpretations of Emma's death-bed
interview. With the most generous interpretation, where readers grant
full-truth to her interview, some will postulate that Emma's testimony
confirms that Joseph never practiced polygamy, but that it was some
massive conspiracy perpetrated by Brigham Young and Heber Kimball.
Here's the relevant question from article "Last Testimony of Sister
Emma" published in The Saints Herald Plano Illinois 1 Oct 1879 when
Joseph Smith III interviewed his mother about her life with her first
husband.

"Q. What about the revelation on Polygamy? Did Joseph Smith have
anything like it? What of spiritual wifery?

A. There was no revelation on either polygamy, or spiritual wives. There
were some rumors of something of the sort, of which I asked my husband.
He assured me that all there was of it was, that, in a chat about plural
wives, he had said, 'Well, such a system might possibly be, if everybody
was agreed to it, and would behave as they should; but they would not;
and, besides, it was contrary to the will of heaven.'

No such thing as polygamy, or spiritual wifery, was taught, publicly or
privately, before my husband's death, that I have now, or ever had any
knowledge of."

Positing that this interview substantiates the historical model that
Joseph never practiced polygamy comes directly into conflict with the
rest of the historical record surrounding his life. We should view this
as a mother giving an interview to her son about her husband who wanted
to keep his and her own good reputation among the anti-polygamy Mormons
still living in Nauvoo under the Reorganization.

There are, however, other accounts which paint a much less generous
picture of Emma's involvement in Nauvoo polygamy, putting her somewhere
on the free-love spectrum or at least open-minded to the idea, and even
possibly leveraging Joseph's subservient wives to do the Smiths' bidding
in and around Nauvoo. In a conversation between Wilhelm Wyl and William
Law in 1887, some interesting perspectives come from Law about his
understanding of the Joseph and Emma Smith love dynamic. This may shed
some light on why the Laws became so opposed to Joseph and Emma and
sought to publish Joseph's tyranny in the Nauvoo Expositor.

""Did Emma, the elect lady, come to your house and complain about
Joseph?"

"No. She never came to my house for that purpose. But I met her
sometimes on the street and then she used to complain, especially
because of the girls whom Joseph kept in the house, devoting his
attention to them. You have overrated her, she was dishonest."

"Do you mean to say that she was so outside of the influence Joseph had
over her?"

"Yes, that is exactly what I mean. Let me tell you a case that will be
full proof to you. Soon after my arrive in Nauvoo the two L\[awrence\]
girls came to the holy city, two very young girls, 15 to 17 years of
age. They had been converted in Canada, were orphans and worth about
\$8000 in English gold. Joseph got to be appointed their Guardian,
probably with the help of Dr. Bennett. He naturally put the gold in his
pocket and had the Girls sealed to him. He asked me to go on his bond as
a guardian, as Sidney Rigdon had done. "It is only a formality," he
said. Foolishly enough, and not yet suspecting anything, I put my name
on the paper. Emma complained about Joseph's living with the
L\[awrence\] girls, but not very violently. It is my conviction that she
was his full accomplice, that she was not a bit better than he. When I
saw how things went I should have taken steps to be released of that
bond, but I never thought of it. After Joseph's death, A. W. Babbitt
became guardian of the two girls. He asked Emma for a settlement about
the \$8000. Emma said she had nothing to do with her husband's debts.
Now Babbitt asked for the books and she gave them to him. Babbitt found
that Joseph had counted an expense of about \$3000 for board and
clothing of the girls. Now Babbitt wanted the \$5000 that was to be paid
Babbitt, who was a straight, good, honest, sincere man, set about to
find out property to pay the \$5000 with. He could find none. Two
splendid farms near Nauvoo, a big brick house, worth from \$3000 to
\$4000, the hotel kept by Joe, a mass of vacant town lots, all were in
Emma's name, not transferred later, but transferred from the beginning.
She always looked out for her part. When I saw how things stood I wrote
to Babbitt to take hold of all the property left by me in Nauvoo and of
all claims held by me again in people in Nauvoo. And so the debt was
paid by me--Emma didn't pay a cent."

"What do you remember about Emma's relations to the revelation on
celestial marriage?"

"Well, I told you that she used to complain to me about Joseph's
escapades whenever she met me on the street. She spoke repeatedly about
that pretended revelation. She said once: "The revelation says I must
submit or be destroyed. Well, I guess I have to submit." On another day
she said: "Joe and I have settled our troubles on the basis of equal
rights." \* \* \* Emma was a full accomplice of Joseph's crimes. She was
a large, coarse woman, as deep a woman as there was, always full of
schemes and smooth as oil. They were worthy of each other, she was not a
particle better than he."

There's a lot to parse out of that exchange, and really the whole
interview, but I'll simply let it stand on its own merits. You can find
the entire thing in the show notes if you care to read it and I would
highly recommend this interview by Wilhelm Wyl of William Law, it's
endlessly fascinating.

The actual revelation on Polygamy was Canonized into the 1876 D&C as
Section 132. The history behind how the revelation came to be is
fascinating. This is from the Joseph Smith Papers project on their entry
of the polygamy revelation. The historical note reads as follows:

"On 12 July 1843, JS dictated a revelation in
his [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#14368401321166751667),
IL, [office](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#749381420308053196)
in the presence of [Hyrum
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#2114268933883569249)
and [William
Clayton](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#17511456606498021340).

Clayton served as scribe for the revelation, which, according to
Clayton, explained "the order of the priesthood," including "the designs
in Moses, Abraham, David and Solomon having many wives & concubines &c."

Clayton later stated that he wrote the revelation "sentence by sentence,
as he \[JS\] dictated." After finishing the dictation, he continued,
"Joseph asked me to read it through, slowly and carefully which I did,
and he pronounced it correct."

According
to [Clayton](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#1051201617243188900)'s
later recollection, the impetus for the dictation of the revelation
was [Hyrum
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#8126528337038336541)'s
request that it be written so that he could convince JS's wife [Emma
Hale
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#15015757662809108319),
who did not approve of the practice of polygamy, of the revelation's
truthfulness.

After JS had dictated the revelation, Hyrum took it to Emma and,
according to Clayton, received a "severe talking to" because she was
"very bitter and full of resentment and anger" about plural marriage.
Hyrum then brought the revelation back to JS. Clayton stated that it was
read to "several of the authorities during the day," including [Newel K.
Whitney](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#8557761441086696959),
who asked that a copy be made. JS agreed, and [Joseph
Kingsbury](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#964191101502353268),
a clerk in JS's [brick
store](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#1924161663279597546),
"carefully copied" the revelation the next day. After that copy was
made, according to Clayton, JS permitted Emma Smith to destroy the
original copy. Clayton, however, declared in 1874 that the copy
Kingsbury made was "a true and correct copy of the original in every
respect" and that it had been "carefully preserved" by Whitney through
the years.

Kingsbury corroborated Clayton's account of the destruction of the
original copy and his own creation of a duplicate copy for Whitney.

Using
the [Kingsbury](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#602441280580325496)
copy as source text, the revelation was first published in an extra to
the Deseret News on 14 September 1852, following the public announcement
of plural marriage. The revelation text was included in a report of the
proceedings of a "Special Conference of the Elders," held 28--29 August
1852, at which [Orson
Pratt](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#10403619032709863943)
acknowledged on behalf of the church the principle of "a plurality of
wives" and the active practice of plural marriage by church
members. [Brigham
Young](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#17435007652332632497)
had [Thomas
Bullock](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#17610043249881823389) read
the text of the revelation to those in attendance and Bullock apparently
used Kingsbury's version to do so.

After the publication of the "Extra," the text subsequently appeared in
several church periodicals including The Seer and the Latter-day Saints'
Millennial Star.

It was included in the Doctrine and Covenants in 1876, and it appeared
in the 1878, 1879, 1882, 1888, and 1891 editions of the Pearl of Great
Price. It was first included in the Doctrine and Covenants as section
132.

The introduction to the section in the 1876 table of contents identified
it as a "Revelation on the eternity of the marriage covenant, including
plurality of wives. Given through Joseph, the seer,
in [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1#17898008995792507051),
Hancock County, Illinois." In 1886, Kingsbury verified the correctness
of these versions, stating that his copy "as also the original are
identically the same as that published in the present edition of the
Book of Doctrine and Covenants."\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revelation-12-july-1843-dc-132/1>

The relevant text in D&C 132 says a number of things. It begins with
discussing the prophets of old taking many wives and explicitly says
from God's first-person perspective that he commanded them to take
multiple wives to raise up seed. After that we arrive at a condemnation
of Emma, likely relating to the Laws or Hyrum Smith or one of the
tangled webs of relationships Joseph and Emma had spun.

"32 Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law
and ye shall be saved.

33 But if ye enter not into my law ye cannot receive the promise of my
Father, which he made unto Abraham.

34 God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife. And
why did she do it? Because this was the law; and from Hagar sprang many
people. This, therefore, was fulfilling, among other things, the
promises.

35 Was Abraham, therefore, under condemnation? Verily I say unto you,
Nay; for I, the Lord, commanded it...

54 And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and cleave unto my
servant Joseph, and to none else. But if she will not abide this
commandment she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord; for I am the Lord
thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law.

55 But if she will not abide this commandment, then shall my servant
Joseph do all things for her, even as he hath said; and I will bless him
and multiply him and give unto him an hundred-fold in this world, of
fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and lands, wives and
children, and crowns of eternal lives in the eternal worlds.

56 And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph
his trespasses; and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses, wherein
she has trespassed against me; and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her,
and multiply her, and make her heart to rejoice....

61 And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood---if any man
espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her
consent, and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have
vowed to no other man, then is he justified; he cannot commit adultery
for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery with that
that belongeth unto him and to no one else.

62 And if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot
commit adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him;
therefore is he justified."

There are reports which survived claiming when Hyrum gave Emma the
revelation that she threw it in the fire, wouldn't be surprising. By
1843, I think Emma may have been a bit fed up with Joseph's shenanigans.
The text of this revelation was circulated among the Mormon elites and
used to justify taking more wives. When Joseph and Brigham locked Martha
Brotherton and ambushed her in the office above the Red Brick Store,
Joseph merely told her that polygamy was right with God and that if
there is any sin in it he'll be the person held responsible before God,
but apparently just communicating this verbally wasn't good enough
anymore. For the necessity of having a written revelation in God speak,
this revelation was used by a few select men in Nauvoo to gain more
wives and justify to their wives the claim that it was a holy law
delivered through the mouth of their modern-day prophet.

It's understandable how the mind-games work here too. 19^th^ century
America was rather averse to polygamy, it was illegal in most states and
at the federal level, but so is murder. When you hearken back to the
story of Abraham and Isaac, Abraham knew killing his son was an immoral
thing to do, but he attempted to do it anyway and God blessed him for
his conviction. The could be and was used to illustrate that polygamy
may not seem moral to you, but God has a plan and sometimes commands us
to do things we think are wrong in order to test our conviction to his
will. When you always have a God in your corner whom you speak for, you
can make any immoral thing sound good. Such was the modus operandi of
Joseph Smith from his earliest treasure-seeking days until his untimely
assassination in 1844.

We all know how Joseph Smith's polygamy came to a close. Eventually,
Joseph would overstep his bounds with prominent public figures in Nauvoo
in his greedy attempts to claim more and more wives into his harem.
Joseph would proposition Sidney Rigdon's daughter, Nancy, who would
viciously reject the proposition and sew a major rift between her father
and his best friend from the good ol' days in Kirtland. In response to
the situation, Rigdon would only enable Joseph's continued consumption
of more women by not speaking out publicly and decrying Joseph's
proposition to Nancy, and they would hold grudges against each other
until Joseph's death.

Joseph eventually agreed with Emma that he could take the Partridge
sisters as wives as long as she was permitted to take William Law as her
polyandrous husband, on the basis of equal rights as William Law called
it from Emma's own words. Joseph married the Partridge sisters and
apparently reneged on his agreement with Emma, commanding her in the
name of God to cleave to her husband and none other or she will be
destroyed, saith the Lord. It seems Joseph may have vacillated on this
conviction because he eventually proposed to Jane Law, wife of William
Law to whom Emma was very attracted, and there may have been talk of
some kind of wife-swap scenario. The Laws, regardless of whether or not
this swapping relationship was consummated, claimed they were dedicated
to each other and none else and took a stand against Joseph and Nauvoo
polygamy once and for all by publishing the Nauvoo Expositor.

The paper was published exclusively by disaffected Mormon leadership who
were angered with Joseph's overreach of powers and extensive flaunting
of the law. The editors and publishers are as follows:

William Law,

Wilson Law,

Charles Ivins,

Chauncey L. Higbee,

Robert D. Foster,

Charles A. Foster.

The expositor had one publication before it was declared a public
nuisance by the Mayor of Nauvoo (Joseph Smith at the time) and the city
council. The council ordered the paper and printing press used to print
it destroyed and scattered in the street, an order to which the city
marshal complied immediately in the dead of night in June 1844.

The preamble of the Nauvoo Expositor features explanations for why this
group of individuals saw it necessary to publish the work. You'll find a
link to a pdf of it on archive.org in the show notes.

"We most solemnly and sincerely declare, God this day being witness o
the truth and sincerity of our designs and statements, that happy will
it be with those who examine and scan Joseph Smith's pretensions to
righteousness; and take counsel of human affairs, and of the experience
of times gone by. Do not yield up tranquilly a superiority to that man
which the reasonableness of past events, and the laws of our country
declare to be pernicious and diabolical. We hope many items of doctrine,
as now taught, some of which, however, are taught secretly, and denied
openly, (which we know positively is the case,) and other, publicly,
considerate men will treat with contempt; for we declare them heretical
and damnable in their influence, though they find many devotees...

We are earnestly seeking to explode the vicious principles of Joseph
Smith, and those who practice the same abominations and whoredoms; which
we verily know are not accordant and consonant with the principles of
Jesus Christ and the Apostles; and for that purpose, and with that end
in view, with an eye single to the glory of God, we have dared to gird
on the armor, and with God at our head, we most solemnly and sincerely
declare that the sword of *truth* shall not depart from the thigh, nor
the buckler from the arm, until we can enjoy those glorious privileges
which nature's God and our country's laws have guarantied to
us---freedom of speech, the liberty of the press, and the right to
worship God as seemeth us good.---We are aware, however, that we are
hazarding every earthly blessing, particularly property, and probably
life itself, in striking this blow at tyranny and oppression;..."

It goes on to print a number of affidavits talking about the polygamy
revelation seen by multiple firsthand witnesses and levels a number of
well-substantiated accusations against Joseph Smith and the Mormon
leadership.

The primary focus of the Nauvoo expositor was Joseph's polygamy, issues
he would rather keep hidden from the public eye. Once the Expositor went
to print, it essentially nailed the coffin shut on Joseph, proving his
sexual and moral improprieties, published by the hands of some of his
fallen trusted Mormon elites.

Joseph would be labeled a tyrant in opposition to free speech and locked
in the Carthage prison where he was eventually assassinated for his
deeds as a direct result of his widespread practice of polygamy among
many other criminal activities.

What started as Joseph's earliest possible sexual indiscretions with
Eliza Winters and the Stowell sisters during the first years of his
marriage to Emma, through the small examples of flings Joseph had in
Kirtland and Missouri, what evolved out of this world driven by Joseph's
libido was an entire underground network of dozens of marriages.
Hundreds or possibly thousands of sexual encounters outside of what was
shared between Emma to Joseph eventually became Joseph's Achilles' heel
and felled possibly the most controversial and epic human of early
American history, whose teachings and doctrines would shape the face of
Western America for centuries to come.

Joseph was a visionary man in every sense of the word. He refused to be
constrained to the moral dicta of the society from whence he sprang. His
actions directly conflicted with the puritanical morality of strict
monogamy and never discussing the bedroom or sexual desires outside of
the bedroom, and flourished in a society with lax regulations and an
extreme lack of education.

Applying revelations of polygamy ascribed to Joseph from the 1830s
merely justifies his later actions and takes them out of the realm of
adultery, putting them in a category of divine celestial marriage,
somehow post-hoc excusing Joseph's actions in Kirtland as divinely
inspired when, clearly, he was just having sex with women who weren't
Emma. This is a futile attempt at applying morality to immoral actions
taken by the founding father of Mormonism.

What's most baffling to me is that Joseph could have approached
sexuality differently. He could have created Mormonism as a free-love
society of communitarian deists who believed they could ascend to
godhood and it would be treated as such today. Constrained by the
Christian societies which birthed Mormonism, free-love ran counter to
what most converts would consider as God's will and Joseph was forced to
practice polygamy underneath the polished Mormon surface with
hypocritical public denials of any sexual impropriety.

We shouldn't judge anyone based on their sexual preferences or
practices, we should judge them based on the content of their character.
Joseph practicing polygamy and free-love was an issue because he lied
about it. Had he approached it with honesty, he wouldn't have been taken
as seriously and Mormonism would probably be a silverware company today
like the Oneida group. Instead, Joseph was pining for converts and did
what he thought was best to not offend the public to gain more
followers, even though his public persona widely conflicted with his
private preferences.

Trying to point out that his actions and lying about them are justified
because we have a revelation from 1831 commanding Mormons to practice
polygamy is dishonest because it ignores Joseph's dishonesty. It doesn't
seem like he was very forthright about his intentions with his
relationships, but instead spent his time speaking out about the vice of
immorality while he was constantly locked in the emotional clutches of
his own immoral sexuality. And when I say immoral, that's because
monogamy being the only legal form of marriage was merely a product of
Joseph's culture. Had Joseph been born in a different time and place in
a vastly different culture, he may have been able to be more open about
free-love. But had he sold a platform of free-love to his own time and
culture, Mormonism would be a wacky fringe religion practiced by some
obscure fundamentalist families. Instead, because of Joseph and Brigham
Young's pragmatic approach and ability to keep polygamy barely
underneath the surface, they've grown to be a world religion with
millions of adherents and billions of dollars in capital and tithing to
throw around and their will. Had Joseph been honest about his
intentions, Mormonism never would have flourished the way it did.

I find this subject particularly important to discuss right now. Not
only have we just hit April of 1841 in our historical timeline, marking
Joseph's first polygamous marriage in Nauvoo to Louisa Beaman, but it
seems like more than ever there's been a rebirth in accusations of sex
scandals and harassment in all forms sweeping popular media. Lately, it
seems every day that people are being fired or indicted on allegations
of sexual harassment or assault, an overall positive shift even if some
of the short-term impacts seem negative at first glance. Most of these
allegations are leveled against rich men in powerful positions, and I'd
be willing to bet that the vast VAST majority of the allegations are
true. People and society at large are very weird about sex. We see it as
a commodity, a reward, a punishment, a practice, a misdeed, some
versions moral, others immoral, a way to express power dynamics, a way
to bind people in a relationship, a mechanism to pass DNA to the next
generation, a way to relieve stress, a way to take out anger, a method
to assert control. Sex does so many things for us, and in so many ways
it's used against us.

Constructing the sexual profile of a person signals other important
characteristics of their personality that we should seek to understand.
Joseph may have been a free-love advocate in his private life, but he
was also a sexual predator in many instances, and that's a binary
personality trait. Either you're a sex predator or you're not, there's
really no excluded middle in that scenario. As soon as Joseph exhibits
one sexually predatory practice, he fills the requirement and he can't
go back to not being a predator.

I wish that meant something to people, but instead we elect a
power-hungry sexual predator to the office of President of the United
States. We need a real sexual renaissance in society today, one unbound
by the moral dictates of any specific religion. We need to treat sex in
a way that respects everyone's freedom of choice and opens the way for
all forms of attraction, identity, and preference, but we're still
limited by the societies from whence our modernity arose.

Maybe that's the most important takeaway. How we treat sex and our
sexuality today is widely not healthy. Society has responded to the
claimed morality of religiously approved sex by caving to religion's
will and accepting it as the status quo. If there's anything we've
learned in viewing the history of sex and relationships, the evolution
of how we treat each other shows that we've come a long way, but I don't
know where we actually sit on the sexual egalitarianism spectrum,
there's probably no way to quantify it. Sex and marriage is arguably
more equal among genders and preferences now than it ever has been
before, but we're not done evolving our societal norms surrounding sex
and love yet.

We're not so far removed from Joseph Smith's time and place. We're
closer to Joseph than he was to the enlightenment. We can judge his
character using our modern sense of morality. Mormons laude his name for
communing with Jehovah, but they're happy to ignore clear signs of
Joseph being a sexual predator. What better way to paint a perfect
portrait of the prophet than by ignoring the facts? It's a powerful
skill Mormons have cultivated for over a century and a half, ignoring
the mortal limitations of Joseph and viewing everything he did through
diamond shaped spectacles as a prophet that could do no evil. Not for
me, I want the real Joseph living in my brain. I don't want an imposter,
I want the human who was born in December 1805 and died in June 1844 to
exist as a living, breathing, human with all his human limitations and
ambitions. That's the real Joseph Smith.

House keeping. No NaMoHE this upcoming Monday, had to move to 11th for
H2H with Dan and Mark.

Jeremy Orison questions:

Tell me about Christ's Church.

How long have you been practicing as a member of Christ's Church?

The focus of our discussion is obviously on fundamental practices of the
teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, can you tell me how Christ's
Church is different from the Brighamite LDS church?

At what point would you claim that Brigham and other sects of Mormonism
broke away from the fundamentals practiced by Joseph Smith?

What kind of a following does Christ's Church have?

Can you tell me a little about the missionary programs the Church
performs?

You and a number of missionaries and members of the church presented at
the 2017 July Sunstone in, SLC, can you tell me a bit about what the
presentations were and how they were received?

How has the mainstream Mormon church or its adherents reacted to the
existence of Christ's Church?

Tell us a bit about the day-to-day life of a practicing member of your
church? You guys don't ride around in horse-drawn wagons with big beards
as far as I'm aware, so what is it like practicing the doctrine and
teachings of Christ's Church?

I've taken a lot of your time today and I graciously thank you for it.
Is there anything you'd like to tell the listeners as a parting thought?

Thank you for joining us today, Jeremy!
