---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 68 - Motivations of a Broken Mind
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-68-motivations-broken-mind/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-68-motivations-of-a-broken-mind
libsyn_embed: 5742290
redirect_from: /2017/09/15/ep-68-motivations-of-a-broken-mind/

category: History
date: 2017-09-14 20:33:50 PDT
---

Ep 68 – Motivations of a Broken Mind

On this episode, we jump right in to adding an incredible well of depth
to the character of Joseph Smith by reading a number of excerpts from
William Morain’s “The Sword of Laban, Joseph Smith and the Dissociated
Mind”. The excruciating pain from his childhood leg surgery coupled with
the death of his eldest brother in his late teens had significant
impacts on Jo’s psyche, baggage he would carry for the rest of his life.
Maybe we can understand the inner-workings of a broken mind by viewing
decisions Jo made through child’s eyes. Jo calls the Quorum of the
Twelve home from their mission in England but permits Parley P. Pratt
(P-cubed) to tarry a bit longer to continue his publishing duties with
the Liverpool Book of Mormon and the Millennial Star. The economic
outlook for Nauvoo looked good on the surface at the end of 1840, but
the whole thing was built on credit and there was a jobs vacuum
affecting every Mormon who chose to settle roundabout. After that we
invite recurring correspondent, Ryan McKnight, for a Mormon Leaks Minute
before dealing with some listener feedback.

Links:

The Sword of Laban by William Morain M.D.  
<https://www.amazon.com/Sword-Laban-Joseph-Smith-Dissociated/dp/0880488646>

Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt  
<http://boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/PPPratt.html>

MLM BYU Francis Bernard Video  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ShoZxwE7Wr4&feature=youtu.be>

John Whitmer History Association  
<https://www.jwha.info/annual-conference>

Mythicist Milwaukee  
<http://www.mythicistmilwaukee.com/mythinformation-conference/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Let’s boot up with some milk to tickle our appetite.

Last week’s episode was all about shifting perspective. We began with
discussing John C. Bennett’s addressing the Mormon leadership during the
October 1840 conference and how his soapboxing likely cast him into the
in-group of trusted Mormon leadership. One of his important provisions
to be adopted into Nauvoo public policy was that 2 to 3 witnesses were
required before a person could be convicted of a crime, which introduces
all sorts of problems, especially when it came to Brokeit’s incredibly
active and predatory sex life. After that, we invited Marie Kent, my
cohost from My Book of Mormon Podcast on to discuss what abortion was
like in the 19<sup>th</sup> century, in addition to a number of other
women’s rights issues. Women having children out of wedlock was
essentially a sentence to utter destitution or death if they didn’t have
a support system to get them through life. I’m glad to live in the
21<sup>st</sup> century.

Our thirst for milk has all but expired, but our hunger for meat
overwhelms, let’s get into it.

Motivation. What is it that gives us motivation? What is it that takes
motivation away? It’s a complex psychological exercise, trying to figure
out our own motivations. What am I going to eat for breakfast this
morning? Trying to ascertain the motives for why a person chooses eggs
and toast over cereal is surprisingly complex and those are only
motivations which work within incredibly constrained parameters. It’s
hard for a person to choose to have genuine Maine lobster for breakfast
when they don’t have ready access to the needed materials to make it
happen, so a person can even be motivated to have that Maine lobster for
breakfast, but their decision is limited to what is reasonable given the
limited choices available to them when they wake up in the morning.

If you want an explanation for why I choose to eat cereal in the
morning, speculating on my motives would be based on who you ask. If you
asked Freud, he might say it’s because my dad always fed me pancakes as
a kid. Ask a behavioral psychologist and they may say it’s because I’ve
had success every day that I’ve eaten cereal whereas days that start
with eggs and toast usually end in disaster. Ask a comparative
psychologist and she might say that I went for the food source which was
easiest to attain with the least expended calories. Ask a social
psychologist and he may say that I chose cereal because it’s what the
majority of my peers eat for breakfast and I don’t want to be an
outcast. Ask a forensic psychologist and they may tell you that I once
read an article that said serial killers frequently eat eggs and toast
for breakfast and I’m not a serial killer so I’m predisposed to choose
the cereal. The truth of the matter is, none of those explanations is
fully accurate and all of those subtle influences may have played a
small part, but you ask me why I chose cereal and I’ll tell you because
I felt like having cereal this morning. The psychologists are there to
analyze why I felt like eating cereal, but personal answer would be much
more simplistic on the face than any explanation these fields of
psychology could offer.

Unfortunately though, those explanations for motivation can be
incredibly complex and each one may only be partially correct, and
that’s with a decision as simple as what to eat for breakfast in the
morning. If somebody were looking back on my life from 200 years in the
future and trying to ascribe motivations for why I chose cereal on any
given morning, they would be at incredible pains to try and explain it,
and they wouldn’t even have the luxury of personally asking me why
cereal instead of eggs and toast. This is the historical roadblock we
consistently run into when trying to judge Joseph Smith and his motives
for any given decision throughout his life. Humans are incredibly
complex problems to attempt any deconstruction which is why the typical
labels usually ascribed to Jo are woefully inadequate to explain his
life. Was he a prophet? Was he a fraud? Was he motivated solely by
testosterone which frequently got out of hand bordering on pedophilia?
Was he sincere in his beliefs but utterly misled by the learned folk of
his day?

We can sit and psychoanalyze Jo’s decisions till were blue in the balls,
but no matter how deep we dig we’ll never understand the full truth or
be able to manufacture a box big enough in which to fit the real Jo
Smith. That being said, psychoanalyzing Jo isn’t an exercise in
futility, the more we understand his complex brain, the more we can see
how naturalistic pressures led him to do any given thing he did and the
less room there is for God to fit in his motivations.

I’ve recently been reading through this book by William D. Morain titled
“The Sword of Laban Joseph Smith and the Dissociated Mind,” available at
a fine retailer near you. William Morain is a reconstructive surgeon
who’s had decades of experience in caring for patients who’ve
undergone horrific experiences requiring major reconstructive surgery.
In doing so, he’s incredibly familiar with the psychology of trauma and
how it affects people, especially children. He relates a number of
personal experiences where he’s had to unwrap and rewrap dressings on
burn children burn victims and he’s seen first-hand what the pain does
to them and how their brains engage certain survival mechanisms to deal
with the pain. He discusses one prominent survival mechanism known as
dissociation, where the individual’s mind essentially disconnects and
goes elsewhere while their body deals with the pain of the given
situation. Those experiences consequently become locked behind
psychological barriers in their mind where they don’t usually remember
actually experiencing the pain, but they may remember that it happened.

Children in a dissociated state of mind experience all sorts of weird
phenomenon as manifestations of this dissociation make themselves
apparent. According to Morain, during this survival mechanism they
frequently regress to younger states of mind, becoming incapable of
understanding their own reality, often becoming incontinent in the
process, lashing out at their parents who are in no way responsible for
the pain they’re experiencing, and a number of other incredible things.
Only half-way through I’m gaining a massive respect for doctors who see
stuff like this day-in and day-out and still somehow get up for work
every day to do it all over again. I’m going to share a few excerpts
from the book as I think it lays an interesting psychological foundation
on which Joseph Smith constructed his empire.

From the preface:

“Bettelheim, a psychoanalyst with special interest in children, made a
convincing case that fairly tales help a child to experience the common
mortal fears shared by all his or her peers by allowing him or her to
express those fears in the world of imagination. Thus those unspeakably
threatening fantasies already lurking in Peter’s \[Dr. Morain’s son\]
mind may be shared with simpletons, giants, and princesses in ways that
assure him that the world has a sense of order and fairness. His rapt
attention has been such confirmation for me of Bettelheim’s wisdom that
I have made certain that a different fairy tale is served up at each
bedtime.”

He goes on to relate an interesting observation:

“Child psychiatrist Lenore Terr has written, “A whole life can be shaped
by an old trauma, remembered or not,” I recall the 45-year-old carnival
roustabout who was burned over 40% of his body when his mobile home
furnace exploded. His repeated dressing changes in the large tub were as
painful as expected. However, he soon became unusually fearful and
tremulous whenever I entered the room, but not when the nurses or the
more junior members of the surgical team approached him. His exaggerated
submissiveness and fear toward me apparently had some hidden
explanation.  
One Saturday morning I put my feet up to have a more leisurely
conversation with him. Steering the conversation from his immediate
family to his childhood, I asked as casually as I could about his
father. The tears broke quickly. This paragon of machismo melted into
the sad child he really was, as he poured out a story of physical
beatings and abuse that continued to torture him long after he had
escaped the blows by running away from home to join the circus. Being
placed in a submissive and powerless role again by a man who inflicted
pain brought back the original emotions and the behavior he had spent
the rest of his life trying to expunge through bravado…  
There was the woman in her fifties with terrible bedsores who clutched
her teddy bear to her cheek and sobbed bitterly whenever we discussed
plans for her treatment. As I knew she had successfully raised a large
family before a mishap had taken away the feeling and use of her legs, I
directed our conversation toward illnesses she might have had as a
child. I learned between her sobs that she had burned her feet severely
while walking barefoot through a dump at the age of 8. She had been
unable to find a way out of the smoldering embers left by a rubbish
fire. There followed weeks of painful treatment in the hospital at the
time. Now, once more\[,\] she became the same 8-year-old she had been
nearly five decades earlier.”

These are merely anecdotal evidences of the phenomenon of dissociated
mind disorder. These people underwent incredible traumas at a very young
age when their mind dissociated as a survival mechanism and it took a
traumatic experience later in their lives to unlock those memories which
almost regressed their minds to the mindset they had when the young age
trauma occurred.

Any of you who know the history of Joseph Smith know where I’m going
with this, and that’s exactly where William Morain goes in the first 3
chapters of his book. Let me read a few more excerpts, and I’m getting
at a much larger overall point, but let’s get there together, don’t get
ahead of the story. What I’m about to read to you offers some
interesting context to who Jo Smith really was and some of the
psychological dynamics which has causal impact on his motivations at
some level.

“There are some additional assumptions that may be properly made.
Joseph, Jr. must have become caught up in the pecking order of sibling
politics in the rivalry over scarce provisions and personal attention in
the teeming Smith household. He might have harbored some jealousy, as
well as awe and affection, for his older brothers Alvin and Hyrum in
particular. But his social aspirations in early life should hardly have
extended much further than gaining preferential favor with his parents
among his several siblings.  
The pivotal event in Joseph’s life that seems, at least in substantial
part, to have profoundly altered his personality occurred shortly after
his seventh birthday.”

Then he goes on to tell of the typhoid fever which overran the Smith
home, infecting every one of the children. Jo was infected, and the
infection caused the lymph node under his left arm to swell up and
required lancing to discharge the fluids. Soon after this successful
procedure, the infection moved down to his left leg. The surgeons
performed 3 separate surgeries to remove the infection with the third
surgery including removal of actual infected bone tissue, which Dr.
Morain gives in explicit detail.

“There was to be a second complication, however. The salmonella typhi
bacteria had already spread through his bloodstream to the upper portion
of his left tibia, the shinbone, where the marrow was being replaced by
a second abscess. As is the natural history of this condition, called
osteomyelitis, the abscess expanded to involve the layer of tissue just
beneath the periosteum, the nourishing membrane ensheathing the bone.
This nerve-rich sheath was expanded by the growing pocket of pus, and
this expansion caused pain greater than any he had ever experienced.
(Indeed, it is widely reported that periosteal pain is more severe than
that of any other tissue.) The intervening bone on the front surface of
Joseph’s tibia was deprived of its blood supply and died. Pus produced a
massive swelling on the front of his leg. This most painful stage of the
illness lasted a full two weeks. Any seven-year-old would have found
such a noxious event to be terribly frightening and excruciating.”

Then it goes on to give Lucy and Jo’s account of the infection but the
passage Dr. Morain writes afterward is important to understand the
psychological dynamics at play during this fragile time in Jo’s young
life.

“Now for a short period, perhaps one of few in his young life, Joseph
Smith, Jr. appears to have been permitted the sole nurturing attention
of his mother. As it had with the oldest daughter, all of the powerful
mixture of maternal emotions induced by her child’s illness rallied
Lucy’s attention now to the cause of her middle son. He was suffering
and in mortal danger. But even this protective, grieving mother was not
omnipotent:

‘During this period I carried him much of the time in my arms in order
to mitigate his suffering as much as possible; in consequence of which I
was taken very ill myself. The anxiety of mind that I experienced,
together with my physical over-exertion, was too much for my
constitution and my nature sank under it.’

From Joseph’s vantage point, however, the admitted failure of his
mother’s nurturing at this point of crisis must have been dreadful. It
is reasonable to assume that the seven-year-old perceived his mother’s
actions as a rejection and betrayal at best or as some form of
punishment at worst. His age-specific powerful affection for his
mother—once all but realized at the moment of his greatest physical
pain—could not have been relinquished without enormous disappointment…

One can scarcely imagine Joseph’s state of fear during those days and
nights as the pain in his leg returned in ever-increasing intensity. He
knew the surgeon would certainly have to return to slash again at the
open wound whose swollen edges had become so tender they could not bear
even the gentlest touch. His mother had abandoned him, he had barely
slept in weeks because of the pain (and nightmares), and the sight and
smell of the oozing mess that used to be his left leg would have
repulsed any seven-year-old into a state of panic…

Fear had by now certainly driven rational understanding of these
terrible events from the child’s mind. The repressed fears would likely
have been erupting with waves of terror as fantasy and reality converged
in the sleep-deprived chaos of his psyche. Something inside
him—something of which he, at age seven, was but vaguely aware—must
have known his father’s companions could exact the ultimate punishment.
His assaulted leg at some level of consciousness would become a powerful
symbol for the terrible conflict of childhood fantasy that he would
never resolve. Had they come to cut it off?”

And if you ever wonder where the vivid hallucinations of angels wielding
swords of fire in Jo’s later years found their genesis, look no further
than the operation itself.

“The instrument case was reopened. Joseph would have dreaded viewing its
contents once again. The chief surgeon, Nathan Smith, always brought the
complete set... Most of all, Joseph would have feared the amputation
knife, that foot-long, sword-like instrument whose design had not
appreciably changed in the hundreds of years since the primitive
barber-surgeons. Most surgical instrument kits carried two or even
three. That “sword”—its pain and its ultimate purpose—had haunted his
dreams and daytime fantasies since it has been first (and for a second
time) plunged into his leg. The sword would not cease occupying those
fantasies, ever.

The swollen, pus-filled tissues were cleaved once again. The sensitive
periosteum was stripped. The trephine was drilled and twisted into the
bone. The largest chunk of dead bone was pried free with a hook. Blood
poured after it. Forceps grabbed smaller chunks and forcefully dislodged
them from the fresh edges of sensitive living tissue. Saws cut through
the margins. The geyser of blood was stemmed with cloth packing, and
then it was over. Joseph’s leg would one day heal. His psyche would
not.”

You may wonder why I decided to include so much of Dr. Morain’s work to
start out the discussion today, well, it has much to do with how this
childhood trauma inflicted unseen wounds on the young Jo’s fragile mind.
This is the penultimate passage I’ll read to get to the broader point of
today’s show.

“As a surgeon, this author can say that Lucy’s description of Joseph’s
behavior is so atypical of a seven-year-old boy facing a surgical
assault that one is tempted to dismiss the entire narrative out of hand.
However, it is possible that her portrayal of Joseph as a brave victim
may have had a grain of validity, but only under a very special
condition. It is typical of children who suffer repeated bouts of
terrible trauma that they may enter a kind of trance or “self-hypnosis”
that protects against the emotional experience of the horror. A kind of
depersonalization supervenes so that the event is experienced as though
it were being viewed from the outside. Lucy’s narrative suggests that
this may have been Joseph maiden voyage into “dissociation.” There would
be many more.”

It tells of Jo being sent to live with his uncle Jesse in Salem, MA, as
soon as he was healthy enough to walk, likely a reprieve from his
parents and a break for his parents from him. Now to the final passage
we’ll read from Dr. Morain’s book today:

“It was probably in his exile at the seashore that the fantasies began,
projected from within by an unspeakable horror he could not recall. As
will be seen, these included huge, violent fantasies. Fantasies of wars.
Fantasies of people in chaos who escape to the seashore. Fantasies of
magic swords that dismember heads and arms. Fantasies of sons
overthrowing fathers, princes killing kings, righteous killing
unrighteous. Fantasies of towers, trees, serpents, flaming swords,
pillars, cigar-shaped boats, sickles, and “stiff-necked” people.
Fantasies of evil men brought to humiliation by young heroes. Fantasies
of good fathers and evil fathers, of faithful women and whores.
Fantasies of good armies and bad armies pushing one another to-and-fro
like battles of ants. Fantasies of betrayal. Fantasies of darkness, of
magic stones that light up the darkness. Fantasies of good white people
and evil black people, of good white people becoming evil black people.
Fantasies of princes being “bound with cords,” of “blood on garments,”
of maggots eating flesh. Fantasies of destroying angels with drawn
swords. The fantasies would flood out of his unconscious in hundreds of
repetitive dreams and nightmares, in daydreams, in random sequences, in
play, in speech, and in silence. They took over the inner life of Joseph
Smith, Jr. as automatic pilot takes over an aircraft. In this state he
limped into his future.”

This episode isn’t just a book report on the first few chapters of “The
Sword of Laban,” by Dr. William Morain, I read so much from the book
because it strikes me as a fundamental piece of the Prophet Puzzle we
need to understand Joseph Smith in proper context. While Dr. Morain goes
on to describe that Jo’s trance-like state was the catalyst for how he
was able to automatic-write the Book of Mormon, with precious and Mr.
Hat as the physical item which cast him into his self-hypnotic state,
the deeper implications of this mental damage wrought on his young mind
had its effects for the rest of his life. Reality didn’t mean much to
Jo, he saw everything in simplistic good and evil terms with simplistic
consequences and simple heroes and villains. Jo had a major problem with
authoritarian figures and they often represented his greatest personal
foes during all his years, but especially once his life came into the
limelight of social prominence.

I think this purview into Jo’s psyche offers some context and reasoning
behind his violent rhetoric against those damned mobocrats which were
always trying to arrest or kill him. But the case shouldn’t be made that
he was consciously thinking of his dad and the team of doctors pinning
him down and inflicting grievous wounds whenever he was preaching
violent rhetoric from the pulpit, the psychological wounds were much
deeper than met the eye, which fundamentally altered his mindset and
outlook on life. This confrontation Jo had with death at such an early
age caused him to see every person as either ally or foe, someone who
was out to help him or hurt him. It eviscerated any nuance his mind
might be able to see in the future, and served to be one of his greatest
weaknesses. When we only see black and white, the colorful world and
colorful folk populating it shrink to 2 dimensions and all nuanced
perspective is utterly lost.

In December of 1840, Jo penned a long-awaited letter to the Quorum of
the Twelve in England and there’s a single passage in it which shows
Jo’s dichotomous mindset of good and evil with no nuance fitting in
between the two.

From the Vogel HoC vol 4 pg 223:

“There are many things of much importance, on which you ask cousel, but
which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon, as you are more
conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am; and I feel great
confidence in your united wisdom; therefore you will excuse me for not
entering into detail. If I should see anything that is wrong, I should
take the privilege of making known my mind to you, and pointing out the
evil.”

Not pointing out the inaccuracies, not pointing out the mistakes;
pointing out the evil. If people were aligned with Jo’s will, they were
good, if they somehow fell into conflict with what he wanted, the
actions, and usually the person, were branded as resoundingly evil.
However, Jo handles a few other important pieces of business in the same
letter, and we’re going to read a few more excerpts to bring in a few
points about motivations and what caused Jo to do or not do what he did
or didn’t do.

“In my former epistle I told you my mind respecting the printing of the
Book of Mormon, Hymn Book, \&c. I have been favored by receiving a Hymn
Book from you, and as far as I have examined it, I highly approve of it,
and think it to be a very valuable collection. I am informed that the
Book of Mormon is likewise printed, which I am glad to hear, and should
be pleased to hear that it was printed in all the different languages of
the earth. You can use your own pleasure respecting the printing the
Doctrine and Covenants. If there is a great demand for them, I have no
objections, but would rather encourage it.”

So, the Quorum got Jo’s stamp of approval for the Liverpool Hymn book
and Book of Mormon to be distributed as soon as could be handled. The
English converts were hungry for Mormon publications and it took too
long and cost too much money to ship them materials from Nauvoo, thus
the Quorum did something good in Jo’s mind. This is convenient because
earlier in the letter, Jo called the Quorum home.

“Being requested to give my advice respecting the propriety of your
returning in the spring, I will do so willingly. I have reflected on the
subject for some time, and am of the opinion that it would be wisdom in
you to make preparations to leave the scene of your labors in the
spring. Having carried the testimony to that land, and numbers having
received it, the leaven can now spread without your being obliged to
stay.  
Another thing:-- there have been whisperings of the Spirit that there
will be some agitations, excitements, and trouble in the land in which
you are now laboring. I would therefore say, in the meantime be
diligent: organize the churches, and let everyone stand in his proper
place, so that those who cannot come with you in the spring, may not be
left as sheep without a shepherd.”

But not all business was handled as it would be necessary to leave a few
of the brethren in England to perpetuate the church there, and make sure
they didn’t fall astray as had so many congregations after baptism and
abandonment by their baptizing elder.

“If Elder Parley P. Pratt should wish to remain in England some time
longer that the rest of the Twelve, he will feel himself at liberty to
do so, as his family are with him, consequently his circumstances are
somewhat different from the rest; and likewise it is necessary that
someone should remain who is conversant with the rules and regulations
of the church, and continue the paper which is published. Consequently,
taking all these things into consideration, I would not press it upon
brother Pratt to return in the spring.”

Pratt would remain in England to continue directing the church and
sending convert immigrants to America until around November of 1842.
This is a quick extract from his autobiography describing the conclusion
of his mission in England. He was quite proud of the millennial star
he’d been publishing for over 2 years from Liverpool up to this point.
Check the show notes for a link to his autobiography.

“Being about to return to America, I published in the October number of
the Star, 1842, my Farewell Address, from which I here give a few
extracts: FAREWELL ADDRESS TO OUR READERS AND PATRONS

Brethren and Friends:--As I am about to take leave of the STAR, and give
it to the management of others, I feel it necessary to make a few
remarks suited to the occasion. This publication was undertaken two
years and six months since. Since that time I have labored diligently,
as far as a pressure of other duties would admit, to render it a useful
and interesting periodical. I have published the principles of the
Latter-day Saints, together with a choice selection of the most
interesting items of news in relation to the progress of these
principles among men.

I have also endeavored at all times to defend the cause of truth, and to
ward off the arrows of envy and slander which have been hurled at the
children of light by the strong arm of thousands who speak evil of
things they understand not. I feel great satisfaction in a review of my
editorial course; I feel my conscience clear, and a secret whispering
within, that I have done my duty faithfully before God.

I also feel to rejoice in the success which has attended the efforts of
the servants of God in this country in the publication of truth. At the
commencement of the STAR, the Saints in Europe numbered less than two
thousand, they now number near ten thousand, besides thousands who have
emigrated to a distant land. This, surely, is a great triumph of the
truth, when we take into consideration the prejudice and opposition
which we have had to encounter. Surely the STAR has stood forth as a
beacon on a hill, as a lonely lamp amid surrounding darkness, to light
the weary pilgrim on his toilsome journey, and to kindle up the dawn of
a day of glory when the effulgent beams of the sun of righteousness
shall shine forth as the morning, and dispel the misty vapors which,
like a gloomy cloud, have for ages hovered over the pathway of mortals.”

Thanks to the efforts of P-cubed, Parley Parker Pratt, the missionary
efforts in England continued to perpetuate, and just to let you know,
those numbers he gave are wildly exaggerated. Let’s get back to another
extract from the letter Jo wrote to the brethren when he called them
back from their mission.

“I am happy to inform you that we are prospering in this place, and that
the Saints are more healthy than formerly; and from the decrease of
sickness this season, when compared with the last, I am led to the
conclusion that this must eventually become a healthy place. There are
at present about 3,000 inhabitants in Nauvoo, and numbers are flocking
in daily…

Provisions are much lower than when you left. Flour is about $4 per
barrel. Corn and potatoes about 25 cents per bushel; and other things in
proportion. There has been a very plentiful harvest throughout the
Union.

You will observe by the Times and Seasons, that we are about building a
Temple for the worship of our God, in this place. Preparations are now
making; every tenth day is devoted by the brethren for quarrying rock,
\&c. We have secured one of the most lovely situations for it in this
region of country. It is expected to be considerably larger than the one
in Kirtland, and on a more magnificent scale, and which will undoubtedly
attract the attention of the great men of the earth.”

This passage standalone paints an optimistic picture for the progress of
the Saints in Nauvoo, but a number of major problems existed which
required a nuanced and pragmatic approach to economics, which Jo was
woefully unable to bring to the table. Contrast that previous passage
with this passage from earlier in the letter:

“I would likewise observe, that inasmuch as this place has been
appointed for the gathering of the Saints, it is necessary that it
should be attended to in the order that the Lord intends it should. To
this end I would say, that as there are great numbers of the Saints in
England who are extremely poor, and not accustomed to the farming
business, who must have certain preparation made for them before they
can support themselves in this country, therefore to prevent confusion
and disappointment when they arrive here, let those men who are
accustomed to make machinery, and those who can command a capital,
though it be small, come here as soon as convenient, and put up
machinery, and make such other preparations as may be necessary, so that
when the poor come on, they may have employment to come to. This place
has advantages for manufacturing and commercial purposes, which but very
few can boast of; and the establishing of cotton factories, foundries,
potteries \&c., would be the means of bringing in wealth, and raising it
to a very important elevation.

I need not occupy more space on this subject, as its reasonableness must
be obvious to every mind.”

One the one hand, Nauvoo was beginning to prosper by the winter of 1840,
but on the other hand, nobody had any jobs other than just farming their
own plots for a meager amount of food to sustain the people of Nauvoo,
hardly any crops were collected for major export operations as the land
had yet to be cultivated to an industrial scale.

The economics of Nauvoo required a conservative hand with some knowledge
of economics, Jo had neither of those attributes. He was motivated by a
relentless desire to raise up a city of followers which looked to him as
the answer man and profit-in-chief. What this amounted to was the
entirety of Nauvoo being built on nothing more than credit, with a chief
export of crippling debt. Jo was being presented with so many contracts
which would serve to build up the kingdom, but the capital the church
could throw around was nothing more than an empty paper bag. Jo and the
church were shouldering tens of thousands in debt, and the Mormons were
buying property from the church, but not enough to pay the debts. This
problem was deeper perpetuated by the fact that Nauvoo was nothing
before the saints got there, and it takes years to build up the
infrastructure of a city with enough industrial exports to match the
resource demands of the population.

Robert Flanders’ book, Nauvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi does a great
job of showing just how in-demand business was in Nauvoo’s early years.
There was a labor vacuum, too many skilled workers in a sprawling
metropolis without any jobs to offer.

From page 147:

“Nauvoo needed industry; almost everyone who commented on the economy or
was responsible for its welfare agreed upon the need. However,
industrializing Nauvoo was more typically the concern of the laborer
seeking employment, the Church official worried about jobs for the poor,
or the consumer anxious about the high cost of imported manufactures
than it was of the profit-seeking capitalist-entrepreneur, of whom there
were relatively few. The kind of workers’ cooperative, self-sufficient,
moneyless economy that budded in Nauvoo and blossomed in Utah was a
natural result…

Many English immigrants were experienced factory workers, including
weavers and other textile laborers, bootmakers, potters, and
carriage-makers. They naturally urged the creation of manufactories in
Nauvoo. Francis Moon wrote home in 1840: ‘we have no factory as yet, but
we want means to build corn mills, and not having much machinery we have
to do at home what would be done at factories if we had them. What we
want is some persons with property for to raise these places… and then
the clothing would be at a less rate, and we English would feel more at
home…But after all this… is a new country…’…

Weaving enterprises would keep in Nauvoo the money spent for clothing
and ‘also furnish many with employment who are better acquainted with
weaving than any other work.’ \[Joseph\] Fielding noted in addition that
‘several have done well at shop-keeping, and it is likely to be a good
business. Farming is also important, as all we get out of the earth…has
not to be purchased from the world.’ John Needham wrote in the summer of
1843: ‘With regard to the laboring people here, we want some one with
money to raise a manufactory or more; we then could employ many idle
hands, and many who go to the neighboring towns and states. This is
caused by the often flush of emigrants, both from the Eastern States and
from England. It would be a great thing for this place to have
manufactories of different kinds, but time and perseverance and
faithfulness before the Lord, will bring \[about\] a good deal…’ No one
was more anxious for industry or enthusiastic about its benefit than
Joseph Smith.”

One need look no further than the Book of Mormon to see Jo’s childish
and naïve approach to economics and morality. One of the central tenets
taught multiple times throughout the Book of Mormon is that the rich
should be charitable by giving all their money to the poor, and that
totally righteous rich people are blessed by the Lord until they become
too rich, then they’re totally evil deserving of some kind of violent
humbling, usually at the hands of the totally wicked dark-skinned
Lamanites.

That’s not how anything in the world works. Jo had a worthlessly
childish view on how to build a city and what an insurmountable
perpetual deficit could do to a city the size of Nauvoo. And I guess
that brings us back to the original point. Jo was probably motivated by
simplistic notions of whatever he considered good, and by extension,
disliked anything he perceived as evil. Unfortunately, the world is
constructed with shades of grey. Anything to build up the kingdom on the
Mississippi was righteous and approved of the Lord, so when
self-interested people would approach Jo with a venomous contract which
would further build up the city, but drive him and the church hopelessly
further in debt, he was motivated to sign the contracts with little
negotiation, because it was in pursuit of a righteous goal, what could
possibly go wrong. But, viewing everything through the eyes of purely
good and evil can cause people like Jo to rationalize whatever makes
them feel good as being the will of God. While his motives of pursuing
whatever God dictates may have been pure, it doesn’t make his decisions
any less damaging or wholly stupid when everything comes out in the
aggregate.

What motivated Jo? I would guess that it was an honest and sincere
desire to fulfill the will of whatever God lived in his mind. However,
in spite of what the world around him thought and how we judge Jo
looking back on his actions, it almost seemed like he could make that
God say whatever he wanted most in life. But that’s just my guess. The
truth of the matter is, Jo marched to the beat of a different drum than
most of his contemporaries. And just like we can never truly know why I
ate cereal this morning, we can never truly know what it was that
actually motivated Jo to become such an anomaly in American history.

MLM

Response to last MLM about Child abuse on Ep 64:

“Anonymous

I was very disappointed the other day with your attitude toward how the
church should handle accusations of sexual abuse. I have volunteered for
years with victims of sexual assault, and while it is important that
people believe and support them, you advocated for the church to publish
details of accusations with no regard for due process or proof. This is
irresponsible and life-shattering for victims of false accusations and
you should be apologizing for promoting it. Do you know how many
teachers get falsely accused of sexual abuse every year? Their lives are
ruined whether or not their names are cleared. Sex offender registries
are a legal punishment for those found guilty of an offence, and no
matter how bad it makes you feel, it's wrong to put people's names out
without guilt established in a court of law. I think you let your
feelings for the church cloud your judgment and I hope you choose to
publish a retraction.”

I’m glad this email came in because it forced me to go back and give the
segment another listen in order to prepare a response and articulate my
position a little better, instead of speaking off the cuff as I did when
the segment first aired.

I think the main point where Anonymous took issue with what I said was
when I said that when allegations of child sex abuse come up, that
should go on a person’s church record and when a bishop attempts to call
that person to a leadership position where they deal with children there
should be an error. I went on to further state that members of the
community should be aware when a single person is accused of sex abuse
and the information should be publicly available so people can protect
their children. I should have substituted allegation there for
conviction. So let me restate it. “When a person is convicted of child
sex abuse, their name should be available on a public registry and an
error message should pop up on the bishop’s screen when he tries to call
them to a leadership position over children. Members of the community
should also be made aware so they can keep their children safe even if
the bishop overlooks the person’s record with child abuse.” Had I said
convicted of sex abuse instead of accusations of sex abuse, I don’t
think anonymous would have taken issue with what I said, because that’s
the whole reason the sex offender registry exists. I don’t think that a
person’s life should be ruined if somebody accuses them a sex abuse, but
their life should definitely change if they’re convicted of it. However,
nuance exists in this, so let me further qualify what I really mean.

It's a well-studied fact that the majority of sex offenses, especially
when it comes to children, go unreported. If Anonymous does, indeed,
work with sexual assault victims, they would understand how rampant the
problem is when it comes to underreporting and lack of prosecuting
people when a sexual assault occurs. I understand that when false
allegations arise of a person committing said atrocity that it can ruin
their lives in many ways, but being raped also ruins a lot of lives, and
more people are actually raped where the perpetrator goes unpunished
than there are false allegations of sexual assault that ruin a person’s
life. A false positive when it comes to sexual allegations can devastate
a person’s life, and if I try to empathize with what that’s like I can’t
imagine how terrible that would be. But there are a lot more false
negatives when it comes to actual sexual assault, and I prefer to air on
the side of caution.

Let me be as crystal clear as possible with what I envision as a few
small fixes which may make the problem slightly better, and I’m coming
at this from the perspective of somebody who never deals with this, has
no experience with sexual assault victims, and am completely ignorant to
much of the nuance of the issue, so take that for what it’s worth. All
ecclesiastical officials at any capacity should be mandatory reporters
in all states, Utah shouldn’t be exempt from it like they are now. The
hotline the church uses for sex abuse cases shouldn’t go to an internal
committee, it should be an outside law enforcement watchdog committee,
the church policing itself on this issue is obviously inadequate. Ryan’s
suggestion of publishing the dollar amount paid out to settle sex abuse
cases by the church would be a wonderful statistic to see because
members wouldn’t know the details of the cases, but they would know that
$X-million of their tithing goes to settle sex abuse cases every year.
Also, women in church authority positions would curtail the problem at a
systematic level. Those are some very small fixes that could only help
make the situation better handled and more transparent. I don’t think
people who are accused of sex abuse should be doxed like the sex
offender registry does unless they’re convicted in a court of law, but
that lets a lot of people slip through the cracks where the majority of
cases go unprosecuted or come down to he-said she-said without any
legitimate evidence to prosecute the offender and I don’t have a
solution to that. Unfortunately for us all, often times the only way a
repeat offender is prosecuted is when a number of disconnected
allegations arise to the point that they can’t all be fabrications or
coincidence, but by the time a conviction comes down on those people,
they’ve done too much damage long before.

So that’s my response to Anonymous’ email. I’m not retracting my
statements so much as I’m correcting some very small word choices and
trying to clarify my position. I await another email if you take issue
with anything I’ve said in this episode.
