---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 74 - Foster Pulls a Pistol on Joseph Smith
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-74-foster-pulls-pistol-joseph-smith/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-74-foster-pulls-a-pistol-on-joseph-smith
category: History
date: 2017-10-27 02:33:47 +0000
---

Ep 74 – Foster Pulls a Pistol on Joseph Smith

On this week’s episode, we read through a bunch of the first revelation
Joseph Smith gave in Nauvoo that made it into the D\&C, section 124.
Since the passing of the Nauvoo Charter, the Mormons could finally rest
easy that they wouldn’t be chased out of Illinois after living there a
year like had happened in Missouri, so they set up camp. By that, I
mean, Jo gave a revelation dictating the organization of Nauvoo to build
it up, starting with the most important parts, like building a house for
Jo and his family. Section 124 has a bunch of important names in it so
we review most of the names and why they’re relevant as we move through
the revelation. After that, Nauvoo holds its first election in February
of 1840, electing John Wreck-it Bennett to the office of Mayor and
various church elites to the offices of aldermen and councilors. Jo
finally had a legally sanctioned theocracy with no looming threat of a
Missouri militia to come and take it away like 2 years ago.

Links:

D\&C 124 1844 vs 2013  
<http://comparedandc.com/>

Nauvoo House  
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Nauvoo_House>

George Miller  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Miller_(Latter_Day_Saints)>

John Snider (Snyder)  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/john-snider-snyder>

Vinson Knight  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vinson_Knight>

William Marks  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Marks_(Latter_Day_Saints)>

Henry G. Sherwood  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/henry-garlick-sherwood>

Robert D. Foster  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_D._Foster>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Let’s review last episode to get some milk in our gizzards.

Last episode we finally gave a proper introduction to Heber C. Kimball,
reading of his middle-of-the-night vision recounted more than 60 years
after it supposedly occurred. We went on to read a letter Wreck-it
Bennett sent to the Mormon leadership announcing the passing of the
Nauvoo Charter, complete with a list of politicians the Mormons should
favor when the next election cycle lapsed. Bennett even gave a nice
little shout-out to ol’ Honest Abe Lincoln for congratulating Bennett on
the passing of the charter. Another sign in the heavens manifested
itself to the quorum of the twelve in England, signaling God’s blessing
on the Nauvoo Charter. After that we were joined by Colt to discuss the
BoM timeline, which received a bit of feedback I’ll be discussing at the
end of the episode.

Lots of history to get to, so, no interview segment this week. Let’s eat
some meat.

We had a ton of feedback about Heber C. Kimball from last episode\!
WOW\! Thank you all so much for participating in giving Heber C. Kimball
a proper NaMo nickname. This was a hard decision because there were so
many good entries. Before revealing Kimball’s name, I have to give a few
shout-outs to honorable mentions. We had Heber Believer from Janice,
Heebie Jeebie Ceebie from John, Night Fever Heber by James because of
his visions, and one of my favorites because of Helen Mar Kimball,
Kid-Pimpin-Kimball from Dustin, and Kimballer by Radovan; those were all
great names and they all gave me a good belly laugh when they came in.
But, one must be the winner and this was suggested by a bunch of people.
Heber C. Kimball will be known to us, for many reasons, as The Heber
Creeper, or Creepy Heebie for short. Cuz he ran a train on his women.
This was first suggested by David Whitmer mere hours after the show
aired on Twitter so be sure to give @davywhhitmer a follow, I mean, he
was a president of a Mormon church for a little while, so follow the
prophet.

Let’s keep this rolling by introducing somebody new to the timeline who
needs a proper NaMo nickname.

Robert D. Foster was born on 14 Mar 1811 in England. He was a physician
and land speculator and was living in Ohio when he married his wife
Sarah Phinney in July of 1837. He was baptized shortly before Oct 1839
and was ordained an elder during that October conference. Foster was
kind of on Jo’s shitlist early on because Jo gave Robert D. Foster the
task of keeping Jo’s journal during the trip out to Washington D.C. back
in the winter of 1839-40. Jo, Rigdon, Foster, and Pistol-Packin’-Port
were the guys during the trip and Foster spent most of his time caring
for Hingepin Rigdon in his sickly state. Foster apparently kept Jo’s
journal during the trip, but every letter Jo sent asking to get the
journals from him, Foster refused to comply. Foster eventually teamed up
with William Law as editor of the Nauvoo Expositor, but not before this
happened with Robert, his brother Charles and a guy named Chauncey
Higbee. Robbie for the Republic is what strikes me upon reading this
story.

From Harold Schindler’s biography of Orrin Porter Rockwell, Man of
God/Son of Thunder beginning on page 111

“Then occurred an incident which very nearly cost the prophet his life.
It began when a Mormon, Augustine Spencer, became embroiled in an
argument with his brother, Orson, a Nauvoo alderman. On hearing of the
dispute, Joseph, as mayor, ordered the arrest of Augustine Spencer on an
assault charge. Before the city marshal could serve the warrant, Josph
and Rockwell located the wanted man in the office of an attorney and
informed Spencer that he was under arrest. Rockwell went for the
marshal, but Spencer refused to accompany him to the mayor’s office.
“Get some help and take him out of here whether he wants to go or
not,” Joseph said.

J.P. Greene, the marshal, stepped to the street and stopped the first
passers-by he saw, ordering them as citizens to aid in removing the
prisoner from the law office. Unfortunately, Greene had made a poor
choice of helpers; he had stopped Chauncey Higbee, \[Robert D.\] Foster,
and Foster’s brother, Charles. Before Greene fully comprehended what was
happening, the three men showered him with invective, shouting that they
would see the mayor and the city damned before lending him any
assistance.

At the first outburst Joseph turned to the perplexed marshal and ordered
him to place the trio under arrest for refusing to assist a city officer
in the discharge of his duty. His words were greeted by an explosion of
curses from the three men. For the husky prophet of the Lord\[,\] such
an abuse was intolerable. Grabbing a Foster in each hand he slammed the
two brothers against a wall, but Charles Foster, anticipating such a
move, pulled a double-barreled pistol from his coat and swung it toward
Joseph. Rockwell leaped forward and smashed his fist against Foster’s
forearm, sending the gun flying across the room.

Insane with rage, his arm dangling loosely at his side, Foster screamed
at the prophet, “Goddamn you, goddamn you—I would have killed you\!” The
sight of his sobbing brother shocked Robert Foster into a stream of
profanity. “I would be favored of God for the privilege of ridding the
world of such a tyrant,\[\!\]” he yelled at Joseph.

The three men were herded to Joseph’s office where he fined them each
$100. They immediately appealed the case to municipal court, and trial
was called for the next day, April 27. Before the matter could be heard,
Joseph pulled Robert Foster aside and asked him not to continue his
public denunciations, but Foster met the request with bitter charges
that Joseph had revived the Sons of Dan in Nauvoo and had been guilty of
adulterous conduct. He cut the conversation short by accusing Joseph of
being a false prophet.”

Robert Frostheart

Robbie the Tyrant Slayer

Maybe something short and simple like Bob Fost, but he doesn’t seem all
that cool and collected and I don’t know if he was a painter.

I leave it up to you to decide. Tweet your best NaMo nickname for Robert
D. Foster with \#NaMoNickname or email at <nakedmormonism@gmail.com> or
go to the website nakedmormonismpodcast.com and put your favorite
suggestion in the contact form and the winner will get a shout-out on
the next episode.

The Nauvoo Charter had passed, it was official, the Mormons had a
government recognized town all to themselves, and they controlled
everything regarding the day to day operations of Nauvoo. For the
previous decade the Mormons had mostly moved to areas that were already
settled and just situated themselves in a nearly parasitic symbiosis
with the local populations. Missouri had sanctioned off Daviess County
for the Mormons, but that was only after they had been expelled from
Jackson County by the mobs, and those Mormon settlements were still
fairly close to larger population centers. Nauvoo presented itself as an
opportunity to start fresh and put in place all the necessary agencies
under church control to handle the business of the burgeoning Mormon
theocracy. But, the Mormon leadership wanted to wait until the approval
of the Nauvoo Charter before they set everything in stone.
Understandably they didn’t want a repeat of what happened in Missouri
with attempting to settle thousands of people in a few small towns and
being summarily removed less than a year later. The Mormons were only
hitting the end of that unspoken year probationary period with their
settlements in Iowa and Illinois, so why go to all the work of settling
and building up a town and school again if they were just going to be
removed and have to head out to California or something? Once the
Charter passed, that was the signal to the Mormon hierarchy that they
could plant their flag in Nauvoo and the state of Illinois would act in
good faith to them, starkly contrasting the Mormons’ experience with
Missouri.

It was necessary to set up so many things we wouldn’t normally consider
when building a town. There was the newly formed city government with a
bunch of elected positions needing to be filled liked Mayor, Aldermen,
Trustee-in-Trust, and a few others. They needed to create new committees
and agencies to deal with infrastructure and the new Nauvoo University.
Building a city from the ground up requires a ton of work, but luckily
for the Mormons, they had God on their side dictating his will for the
perfect city.

For 3 days beginning on 16 January 1841, Jo dictated a famous revelation
included in the modern-day D\&C, or book of Covenants because they
removed the Doctrine part, section 124. We’re going to read a number of
extracts from it today and discuss each person’s role in the city.
Before we do, let’s qualify what we’re about to read because I find it
truly remarkable.

One aspect of Mormon history that we talk about all the time is how much
the Brighamite church tries to ignore or cover up certain aspect of
their history. One way they actively cover things up is by redacting
names and occurrences from documents they hold in only their library
which can’t be accessed online. They have a stranglehold on the
information which comes out of their own archives, and that’s always
something to be suspicious about. The redactions they have are usually
of names of people who were sealed to other people in polygamy or names
and dates of persons who received their second anointing, information
which affects the historic record, but in the grand scheme of things
seems fairly inconsequential to yours truly. What’s much more
controversial in my mind is something the church doesn’t seem to hide
one bit and that’s how much control Joseph as the Prophet had over
government and secular affairs. He called himself Lieutenant-General for
God’s sake, Jo was the sole authority in Nauvoo over church AND state
affairs, there was no separating the two. The church makes hardly any
effort to cover up this incredibly salacious aspect of Mormon history
when Jo was in constant stark conflict with the first amendment of the
constitution. Legally speaking, I find the government aspects of early
Mormon history to be where the controversy truly lies. This section 124
we’re about to deconstruct exhibits an incredible confluence of early
Mormon church and state government being the same entity, and the will
of God directing Jo and the other leaders through divine revelation on
specific aspects of creating the Nauvoo city government. There are some
interesting line-items included here with amazing specificity, it’s nice
when God can be specific enough to tell us what value to set for a
company’s stock. This was the first revelation included in the Book of
Covenants Jo had in over a year, the last revelations he gave were from
the Liberty Jail cell nearly 2 years prior to this.

1 Verily 🍺, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am
well pleased with your offering and acknowledgements, which you have
made, for unto this end have I raised you up, that I might shew forth my
wisdom through the weak things of the earth.

Your prayers are acceptable before me, and in answer to them I say unto
you, that you are now called, immediately to make a solemn proclamation
of my gospel, and of this stake which I have planted to be
a corner-stone of Zion, which shall be polished with that refinement
which is after the similitude of a palace.

This proclamation shall be made to all the kings of the world, to the
four corners thereof-To the honorable President elect, and the
high-minded governors of the nation in which you live, and to all the
nations of the earth, scattered abroad.

Let it be written in the Spirit of meekness, and by the power of the
Holy Ghost, which shall be in you at the time of the writing of the
same;

for it shall be given you by the Holy Ghost to know my will concerning
those kings and authorities, even what shall befal them in a time to
come.

4 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant Robert B. Thompson
help you to write this proclamation; for I am well pleased with him, and
that he should be with you;

let him, therefore, hearken to your counsel, and I will bless him with a
multiplicity of blessings; let him be faithful and true in all things
from henceforth, and he shall be great in mine eyes;

but let him remember that his stewardship will I require at his hands.

6 Again, let my servant John C. Bennett, help you in your labor in
sending my word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand by you,
even you my servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of affliction, and his
reward shall not fail, if he receive counsel;

and for his love he shall be great; for he shall be mine if he do this,
saith the Lord. I have seen the work which he hath done, which I
accept, if he continue, and will crown him with blessings and great
glory.

7 And again, I say unto you, that it is my will that my servant Lyman
Wight should continue in preaching for Zion, in the spirit of meekness,
confessing me before the world, and I will bear him up as on eagle's
wings, and he shall beget glory and honor to himself, and unto my name,

8 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, my servant George Miller is
without guile; he may be trusted because of the integrity of his heart;
and for the love which he has to my testimony, I the Lord loveth him;

I therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of
a bishoprick, like unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may
receive the consecrations of mine house, that he may administer
blessings upon the heads of the poor of my people, saith the Lord. Let
no man despise my servant George, for he shall honor me. (George Miller
was a convert in 1839. He was living in Illinois when the Mormon
refugees began streaming in and even housed some of them on his property
prior to his conversion to the faith.)

9 Let my servant George, and my servant Lyman, and my servant John
Snider, and others, build a house unto my name, such an one, as my
servant Joseph shall show unto them; upon the place which he shall show
unto them also. (Nauvoo House, not Temple) (John Snider had been
baptized in 1836 and immediately invested in the KSS company before it
crashed and was tied to the Mormons from that time forward. He served on
the first mission to England in 1837, and was later ordained a member of
the Seventy)

And it shall be for a house for boarding, a house that strangers may
come from afar to lodge therein: therefore, let it be a good
house, worthy of all acceptation, that the weary traveller may find
health and safety while he shall contemplate the word of the Lord, and
the corner-stone have I appointed for Zion.

This house shall be a healthy habitation, if it be built unto my name,
and if the governor, which shall be appointed unto it shall not suffer
any pollution to come upon it. It shall be holy, or the Lord your God
will not dwell therein.

…for there is not a place found on earth that he may come and restore
again that which was lost unto you, or, which he hath taken away, even
the fulness of the priesthood;

for a baptismal font there is not upon the earth; that they, my saints,
may be baptized for those who are dead:

for this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to
me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a
house unto me.

But I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I
grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me, and during
this time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

11 But, behold 🍺, at the end of this appointment, your baptisms for your
dead shall not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these things at
the end of the appointment, ye shall be rejected as a church with your
dead, saith the Lord your God.

For, verily 🍺 I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time to
build a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the dead be
longeth, and for which the same was instituted from before the
foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be
acceptable unto me;

for therein are the keys of the holy priesthood, ordained, that you may
receive honor and glory… (then it goes on for a number of verses talking
about the importance of the Nauvoo house and conducting washings and
anointings and baptisms for the dead there…)

18 And now, I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding-house, which I
have commanded you to build, for the boarding of strangers, let it be
built unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let my servant
Joseph and his house have place therein, from generation to generation:

for this annointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing shall
also be put upon the head of his posterity after him;…

and let the name of that house be called the Nauvoo House; and let it be
a delightful habitation for man, and a resting place for the weary
traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the glory of
this the corner-stone thereof;

that he may receive, also, the counsel from those whom I have set to be
as plants of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls.

19 Behold 🍺\! verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant George Miller, and
my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter
Haws, organize themselves, and appoint one of them to be a president
over their quorum for the purpose of building that house.

And they shall form a constitution whereby they may receive stock for
the building of that house.

And they shall not receive less than fifty dollars for a share of stock
in that house, and they shall be permitted to receive fifteen thousand
dollars from any one man for stock in that house;

but they shall not be permitted to receive over fifteen thousand dollars
stock, from any one man;

and they shall not be permitted to receive under fifty dollars for a
share of stock from any one man, in that house;

and they shall not be permitted to receive any man as a stockholder in
this house, except the same shall pay his stock into their hands at the
time he receives stock;

and in proportion to the amount of stock he pays into their hands, he
shall receive stock in that house; but if he pay nothing into their
hands, he shall not receive any stock in that house.

And if any pay stock into their hands, it shall be for stock in that
house, for himself, and for his generation after him, from generation to
generation, so long as he and his heirs shall hold that stock, and do
not sell or convey the stock away out of their hands by their own free
will and act: if you will do my will, saith the Lord your God.

20 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, if my servant George Miller, and
my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter
Haws, receive any stock into their hands, in moneys, or in
properties, wherein they receive the real value of moneys, they shall
not appropriate any portion of that stock to any other purpose, only in
that house;

and if they do appropriate any portion of that stock any where else,
only in that house, without the consent of the stockholder, and do not
repay fourfold, for the stock which they appropriate any where else,
only in that house, they shall be accursed, and shall be moved out of
their place, saith the Lord God, for I the Lord am God, and cannot be
mocked in any of these things.

21 Verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant Joseph pay stock into their
hands for the building of that house, as seemeth him good; but my
servant Joseph cannot pay over fifteen thousand dollars stock in that
house, nor under fifty dollars; neither can any other man, saith the
Lord.

22 And there are others also, who wish to know my will concerning
them; for they have asked it at my hands:

Therefore I say unto you, concerning my servant Vinson Knight, if he
will do my will, let him put stock into that house for himself and for
his generation after him, from generation to generation,

and let him lift up his voice, long and loud, in the midst of the
people, to plead the cause of the poor and the needy, and let him not
fail, neither let his heart faint, and I will accept of his
offerings; for they shall not be unto me as the offerings of Cain, for
he shall be mine, saith the Lord.

Let his family rejoice, and turn away their hearts from affliction, for
I have chosen him and anointed him, and he shall be honored in the midst
of his house, for I will forgive all his sins, saith the Lord; Amen.
(Vinson Knight had been a member of the Kirtland, Ohio Bishopric and was
later ordained as a Bishop in Adam-ondi-Ahmen during the Mormons’ brief
time settling Daviess county before their removal. Jo designating him as
Bishop and telling him to be mindful of the poverty-stricken Saints were
cause and effect. Remember, at this time, the primary function of the
Bishop was coordinating the logistics of the church storehouses which
stock supplies for Mormons needing welfare. Vinson Knight would be
dealing with the poorest Mormons and trying to somehow provide for them
from the church’s storehouse of goods, which wasn’t really a thing since
the last storehouse was raided and dissolved in Missouri. Communalism
doesn’t seem to work very well when practiced on a scale of thousands of
people.)

23 Verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant Hyrum put stock into that
house, as seemeth him good, for himself and his generation
after after him, from generation to generation.

24 Let my servant Isaac Galland put stock into that house, for I the
Lord loveth him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his
sins; therefore, let him be remembered for an interest in that
house, from generation to generation.

Let my servant Isaac Galland be appointed among you, and be ordained by
my servant William Marks, and be blessed of him, to go with my servant
Hyrum, to accomplish the work that my servant Joseph shall point out to
them, and they shall be greatly blessed. (William Marks is an
interesting character in Mormon history. He hasn’t distinguished himself
above and beyond other trusted leaders up to this point, but as we
progress through Nauvoo he will steadily become more important. Marks
was one of the few of the leadership who, like Hingepin Sidney Rigdon,
viciously hated polygamy, he and Rigdon were actually very good friends
until Rigdon further shrunk away from the scene in late 1842-43 when
Marks argued that he didn’t deserve his position as one of the
Presidents of the Church due to inactivity and lack of involvement.
However, after the death of Jo and Hyrum in Carthage, Marks was one of
the few advocates for Rigdon being the rightful successor to Jo’s empty
throne. He was soon disabused of these notions and went to Beaver Island
to serve as a counselor to James Strang. We’ll talk more about him as he
occasionally crops up.)

25 Let my servant William Marks pay stock into that house, as seemeth
him good, for himself and his generation, from generation to generation.

26 Let my servant Henry G. Sherwood pay stock into that house, as
seemeth him good, for himself and his seed after him, from generation to
generation. (Henry Sherwood had been a member since 1832 and was
involved in basically every large event of the church with the exception
of Zion’s Camp. He would soon be designated the Nauvoo city Marshal and
was one of many leaders of Nauvoo Legion and would be one of the members
of the first pioneer group to Utah in 1847)

27 Let my servant William Law pay stock into that house, for himself and
his seed after him, from generation to generation.

If he will do my will, let him not take his family unto the eastern
lands, even unto Kirtland; nevertheless I the Lord will build up
Kirtland, but I the Lord have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants
thereof. (We’ll talk William Law in coming episodes, basically, through
the butterfly effect, William Law got Jo and Hyrum killed after Jo
propositioned William and Jane Law to be swingers with him and Emma.)

Therefore, let my servant William put his trust in me, and cease to fear
concerning his family, because of the sickness of the land. If ye love
me, keep my commandments, and the sickness of the land shall redound to
your glory.

28 Let my servant William go and proclaim my everlasting gospel, with a
loud voice, and with great joy, as he shall be moved upon by my spirit,
unto the inhabitants of Warsaw, and also unto the inhabitants of
Carthage, and also unto the inhabitants of Burlington, and also unto the
inhabitants of Madison, and await patiently and diligently for further
instructions at my general conference, saith the Lord.

If he will do my will, let him from henceforth hearken to the counsel of
my servant Joseph, and with his interest support the cause of the poor,
and publish the new translation of my holy word unto the inhabitants of
the earth;

and if he will do this, I will bless him with a multiplicity of
blessings, that he shall not be forsaken, nor his seed be found begging
bread.

(Next, Jo sets up his own leadership. The vacuum left behind by the
death of BDC, Joseph Sr., needed to be filled by the person whom BDC had
designated, and that was Hyrum, creating a vacancy in Jo’s ranks of
counselors. The next few verses promote Hyrum to Patriarch over the
church, giving him power seemingly equal with Jo’s own, and also
designating that William Law fill the vacancy left by Hyrum’s
promotion.)

29 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant William be
appointed, ordained, and anointed, as a councillor unto my servant
Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum; that my servant Hyrum may take
the office of priesthood and patriarch, which was appointed unto him by
his father, by blessing and also by right,

that from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings
upon the heads of all my people,

that whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curseth shall
be cursed: that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven;

and from this time forth, I appoint unto him that he may be a
prophet and a seer and a revelator unto my church, as well as my
servant Joseph,

that he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph, and that he
shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall shew unto him
the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same
blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the
priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver
Cowdery;…

31 Behold 🍺 I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant
William and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my servant
Joseph tarry at home, for he is needed; the remainder I will shew unto
you hereafter: even so; Amen.

32 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, if my servant Sidney Rigdon will
serve me and be councillor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and
come up and stand in the office of his calling, and humble himself
before me;

and if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering,
and acknowledgements, and remain with my people, behold 🍺, I the Lord
your God will heal him that he shall be healed; and he shall lift up his
voice again on the mountains, and be a spokesman before my face.

Let him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my
servant Joseph resides,

and in all his journeyings let him lift up his voice as with the sound
of a trump, and warn the inhabitants of the earth to flee the wrath to
come;

let him assist my servant Joseph; and also let my servant William Law
assist my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto the kings
of the earth, even as I have before said unto you.

If my servant Sidney will do my will, let him not remove his family unto
the eastern lands, but let him change their habitation, even as I have
said.

Behold 🍺, it is not my will that he shall seek to find safety and refuge
out of the city which I have appointed unto you, even the city of
Nauvoo.-

Verily 🍺 I say unto you, even now, if he will hearken to my voice, it
shall be well with him: even so; Amen.

(The next few verses are a little confusing. You’ll hear the name Robert
D. Foster, who is the subject of this week’s NaMo nickname. It talks
about building a house for Jo, but it’s not talking about the Nauvoo
House discussed at length in the earlier verses, this next set of verses
were talking about the Nauvoo Mansion, which Jo and Emma moved in to on
31 August 1841.)

34 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster
will obey my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph,
according to the contract which he has made with him, as the door shall
be open to him from time to time;

and let him repent of all his folly, and clothe himself with
charity, and cease to do evil, and lay aside all his hard speeches,

35 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, let no man pay stock to the
quorum of the Nauvoo House, unless he shall be a believer in the Book of
Mormon, and the revelations I have given unto you, saith the Lord your
God:

for that which is more or less than this cometh of evil, and shall be
attended with cursings and not blessings, saith the Lord your God: even
so; Amen. (Jo was trying to have a quality control on those who invested
in the Nauvoo House, because he already had a certain level of undue
influence over them he could exert as their prophet should they step out
of line. The next verses we’re skipping just say that people can be paid
stock in the Nauvoo House for their labor in building it.)

37 Verily 🍺 I say unto you, I now give unto you the officers belonging
to my Priesthood, that ye may hold the keys thereof, even
the priesthood which is after the order of Melchisedek, which is after
the order of my only begotten Son.

38 First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith to be a patriarch unto you to hold
the sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of promise,
whereby ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that ye may not
fall; notwithstanding the hour of temptation that may come upon you.

39 I give unto you my servant Joseph, to be a Presiding Elder over all
my church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer and prophet.

I give unto him for councillors my servant Sidney Rigdon, and my servant
William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and first presidency, to
receive the oracles for the whole church.

40 I give unto you my servant Brigham Young, to be a president over
the twelve travelling council,

which twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom upon
the four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word to every
creature;

they are: Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde,
William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard
Richards, George A. Smith;

David Patten I have taken unto myself, behold 🍺 his priesthood no man
taketh from him; but verily 🍺 I say unto you, another may be appointed
unto the same calling.

41 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a High Council, for
the cornerstone of Zion;

viz: Samuel Bent, H. G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles C. Rich,
Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Lewis Dunbar Wilson; Seymour
Brunson I have taken unto myself, no man taketh his priesthood, but
another may be appointed unto the same priesthood in his stead, (and
verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant Aaron Johnson be ordained unto
this calling in his stead,) David Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William
Huntington Sr.

42 And again, I give unto you Don Carlos Smith to be a president over
a Quorum of High-priests:

which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who
shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes
scattered abroad,

and they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for
standing presidents, this is the office of their calling saith the Lord
your God.

I give unto him Amasa Lyman and Noah Packard for councillors that
they may preside over the quorum of high-priests of my church saith the
Lord.

43 And again I say unto you, I give unto you John A. Hicks, Samuel
Williams, and Jesse Baker which priesthood is to preside over the quorum
of Elders which quorum is instituted for standing
ministers, nevertheless they may travel, yet they are ordained to be
standing ministers to my church, saith the Lord.

44 And, again, I give unto you Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield, Daniel
Miles, Henry Harriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James Foster, to
preside over the quorum of seventies,

which quorum is instituted for travelling elders to bear record of my
name in all the world, wherever the travelling high
council, my apostles, shall send them to prepare a way before my face.

The difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders is, that one
is to travel continually, and the other is to preside over the churches
from time to time, the one has the responsibility of presiding from time
to time and the other has no responsibility of presiding, saith the Lord
your God.

45 And again I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H.
Smith, and Shadrach Roundy if he will receive it to preside over
the Bishopric, a knowledge of said Bishopric is given unto you, in
the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

46 And, again, I say unto you Samuel Rolfe and his councillors
for Priests, and the president of the Teachers and his councillors and
also the president of the Deacons and his councillors, and also the
president of the Stake and his councillors:

the above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof for helps
and for governments, for the work of the ministry, and the perfecting of
my saints,

and a commandment I give unto you that you should fill all these offices
and approve of those names which I have mentioned or else disapprove of
them at my general conference,

and that ye should prepare rooms for all these offices in my house when
you build it unto my name saith the Lord your God: even so: Amen.”

Alright, that was an important revelation for so many reasons. Until
this January 1841 revelation came along, the church leadership was made
up of a patchwork of committees and organizations to serve very specific
needs when those needs arose. This was Jo’s way of hitting the reset
button and establishing once and for all the government of the church.
But this wasn’t just a government for the church, it was the
ecclesiastical version of the Nauvoo city government. On February
1<sup>st</sup>, less than half a month after this revelation was given
and widely published in the Times and Seasons, Nauvoo held its first
election.

This is taken from the Dan Vogel HoC 4:280

“Monday \[Feb 1\]—The first election for members of the City Council
took place and the following persons were elected by majorities varying
from 330 to 337 votes; to wit, for mayor, John C. Bennett; Aldermen,
William Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, Newell K. Whitney;
Councilors, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Charles C. Rich,
John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P. Greene, Vinson
Knight.”

And later from that same page:

“At a meeting of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at
this place, On Saturday, the 30<sup>th</sup> day of January, A.D. 1841,
I was elected Sole Trustee for said Church, to hold my office during
life…, and vested with plenary powers, as sole Trustee in Trust for the
Church…, to receive, acquire, manage, or convey property, real,
personal, or mixed, for the sole use and benefit of said church,…

Joseph Smith”

Did you recognize any similar names in Joseph’s revelation now included
as Section 124, and those of the elected officials of Nauvoo? Well, most
of the names included in 124 were people who were given certain
directives in the organization of the church, and all but one of the
people elected to public office in the city of Nauvoo were Mormons, and
all of those Mormons were prominent elites in leadership positions in
the church. John T. Barnett was the one non-Mormon elected to Nauvoo
public office, and there may have been other reasons for electing him,
we’ll hopefully get into that in coming episodes.

Our government is a representative democracy, at least that’s how it was
conceived. In order to govern people, there should be elected
representatives who actually represent the population that elected them.
You have an area with predominantly latino, or black population, they
should have a latino or black person representing them in government.
With a majority Christian country, the majority of elected officials
should be Christian to properly represent the voting constituents.
However this has actually played out, I don’t want to comment on, I’m
more discussing how the democracy was conceived in the first place with
locally elected representatives. Nauvoo was made up of almost
exclusively Mormons, so in a representative democracy, the public
offices there should be held by almost entirely Mormons. That’s a
separate issue with respect to how a church influences the politicians
and elected officials who represent a given area with a majority church
population.

Look, the Mormon church conglomeration today can run from church history
and polygamy and everything they try to hide from church history all it
wants because the church thinks those issues are behind them. They can
redact and omit whatever they want while teams of historians dig through
their trash for the evidence needed to build compelling historical
models. The Mormon impact on government is something infecting every
piece of Mormon history and it’s not something they can say they stopped
doing at any point. They’re proud of it when they publish articles
through the Deseret News talking about the newest amicus brief they
filed against gay people getting a fucking cake or trans people being
able to use the bathroom they goddamn well please.

Morality and politics should be separate from each other. Our morality
should motivate our politics, but when a religious organization is
dictating a population’s morality and by extension their politics, now
we have a stark violation of the constitution and we edge closer to
theology dictating the actions of our democracy, a theocracy. John
Wreck-it Bennett sent that letter last episode which named all the
public officials the Mormons should get behind because they helped pass
the Nauvoo Charter in some way. For the next half decade, nobody got
elected in areas representing Nauvoo without the blessing of the
Mormons. If we chase the line of influence, that means Jo was the sole
mind dictating who would and would not get into government and if
anybody wanted to get elected, they had to pay the Mormons some kind of
obligation to gain their favor.

It wouldn’t be for another 110 years until the Johnson Amendment was
written into the IRS tax code making it illegal for churches to endorse
or oppose political candidates, but the sentiment still existed and most
religious people back then, as now, realized that a government with a
solid wall of church/state separation required good faith among
religious officials and government officials to at least not be overt in
their influence over each other.

To really understand the nature of what I’m talking about here, I offer
a few interesting examples from that most correct book that Mormons
venerate.

3 NE: 18 Now the chiefest among all the chief captains and the great
commander of all the armies of the Nephites was appointed, and his name
was Gidgiddoni.

19 Now it was the custom among all the Nephites to appoint for their
chief captains, (save it were in their times of wickedness) some one
that had the spirit of revelation and also prophecy; therefore, this
Gidgiddoni was a great prophet among them, as also was the chief judge.

20 Now the people said unto Gidgiddoni: Pray unto the Lord, and let us
go up upon the mountains and into the wilderness, that we may fall upon
the robbers and destroy them in their own lands.

21 But Gidgiddoni saith unto them: The Lord forbid; for if we should go
up against them the Lord would deliver us into their hands; therefore we
will prepare ourselves in the center of our lands, and we will gather
all our armies together, and we will not go against them, but we will
wait till they shall come against us; therefore as the Lord liveth, if
we do this he will deliver them into our hands.

Alma 43: 16 Now, the leader of the Nephites, or the man who had
been appointed to be the chief captain over the Nephites—now the chief
captain took the command of all the armies of the Nephites—and his name
was Moroni;

17 And Moroni took all the command, and the government of their wars.
And he was only twenty and five years old when he was appointed chief
captain over the armies of the Nephites.

23 But it came to pass, as soon as they had departed into the wilderness
Moroni sent spies into the wilderness to watch their camp; and Moroni,
also, knowing of the prophecies of Alma, sent certain men unto him,
desiring him that he should inquire of the Lord whither the armies of
the Nephites should go to defend themselves against the Lamanites.

24 And it came to pass that the word of the Lord came unto Alma, and
Alma informed the messengers of Moroni, that the armies of the Lamanites
were marching round about in the wilderness, that they might come over
into the land of Manti, that they might commence an attack upon the
weaker part of the people. And those messengers went and delivered the
message unto Moroni.

More from Alma 51: 15 And it came to pass that he sent a petition, with
the voice of the people, unto the governor of the land, desiring that he
should read it, and give him (Moroni) power to compel those dissenters
to defend their country or to put them to death.

16 For it was his first care to put an end to such contentions and
dissensions among the people; for behold, this had been hitherto a cause
of all their destruction. And it came to pass that it was granted
according to the voice of the people.

17 And it came to pass that Moroni commanded that his army should go
against those king-men, to pull down their pride and their nobility and
level them with the earth, or they should take up arms and support the
cause of liberty.

18 And it came to pass that the armies did march forth against them; and
they did pull down their pride and their nobility, insomuch that as they
did lift their weapons of war to fight against the men of Moroni they
were hewn down and leveled to the earth.

19 And it came to pass that there were four thousand of
those dissenters who were hewn down by the sword; and those of their
leaders who were not slain in battle were taken and cast into prison,
for there was no time for their trials at this period.

These are the people Jo wrote about in the Book of Mormon, in the
religious text Mormons uphold as the divine word of God. These prophet
Kings like Alma, Nephi, Gidgiddoni, and Moroni all committed atrocities.
We would drone strike the fuck out of any of these people today, but
they’re treated as great holy warrior prophet-kings replete throughout
the Book of Mormon. Anytime a Mormon says they love the Book of Mormon
and follow its teachings, be happy that they don’t really know their
Book of Mormon all that well because theocracies were how the Book of
Mormon operated, and a theocracy is what Joseph Smith had successfully
built. Nauvoo had an education system, its own army, a few dissenters
who were put out of the way, and it was led by the elite of the church
all looking to Jo for direction who would later crown him King over the
entire world. Let that shit sink in. Next time you’re talking to a
Mormon, ask them if this is a system that will create the most good for
the most people. Is this really a society in which we want to live? What
level are we willing to allow religious involvement in government before
it’s too far? Once we’ve determined a religion is influencing government
too much, how does one go about taking that power back without becoming
an analogue of the Book of Mormon King-men who experienced genocide at
the hands of Lieutenant-General Prophet Moroni?

Yeah, we can point and laugh at the God of the Old Testament or the
passages in the Qu’ran which command genocide over and over again, but
the Book of Mormon doesn’t have 2000 or 1400 years of antiquity to
justify its horrible content. It was written in the 19<sup>th</sup>
century on free American soil by a man who set himself up a theocratic
throne in Illinois and was poised to become a warlord with his own army
and haram of women. Joseph Smith said of himself that he would become a
second Mohammed unto his generation when the Missouri persecution was
too much to handle. This is your guy Mormons? This is who you sing
praises to for communing with Jehovah? Any person who claims themselves
to be fundamental or orthodox Mormon, or even a follower of the Book of
Mormon’s teachings is a person who either doesn’t truly understand their
own religion, or they do understand their religion and should be
justifiably condemned for believing such horrible and damaging things
from an earlier ignorant generation of society. We owe it to those
people to disabuse them of their ignorance and we owe it to society to
stand united against any form of religious theocracy.
