---
layout: post
title: Ep 58 - Fop or a Fool for POTUS
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-58-fop-fool-potus/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-58-fop-or-a-fool-for-potus
category: History
date: 2017-07-14 05:15:33 +0000
---

Ep 58 - Fop or a Fool for POTUS

On this week's episode, we jump right into the latter part of 1839 with
the quorum of the Twelve petitioning Jo to release the copyright on the
Book of Mormon to begin printing the 1840 edition. The Times and Season
church periodical begins circulating, and Jo finally departs for
Washington D.C. to speak with the POTUS about helping the Mormon
refugees out of their dire straits. The meeting doesn't go as planned,
but Jo and Rigdon weren't done asking the government for relief and are
stuck in D.C. for another month and a half waiting for Congress to come
back from winter recess. We finish up the episode with airing a
conversation I had with Molly UnMormon on Doubting Dogma Podcast,
discussing the Martin and Willie handcart companies and other fun church
stuff. Please consider supporting the podcast during our Patreon Pledge
drive to get in on all the extra content! Patreon.com/nakedmormonism.

Links:

Doubting Dogma Podcast\
<http://doubtingdogma.libsyn.com/>

Inciting Incident Podcast\
<http://www.incitingincident.libsyn.com/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Before we get started today, we're continuing our Patreon pledge drive
to increase listener support and more importantly, to give those that do
support more of what they want. Look everybody, asking for money is a
tough thing to do, but it's an important part of what makes this
research possible. If not for you generous supporters, I wouldn't be
able to pour the necessary hours into research for this show, and for
that I thank you very much. Let's just take a second to analyze what it
is you're doing when you choose to pledge a dollar or two an episode.
This podcast is dedicated to telling Mormon history the in an accessible
format. But look at our competition. We are devoted to deconstructing a
religion with 180+ years of complicated history, millions of followers,
and billions of dollars in assets which they devote to telling a
Hollywood bullshit version of their own history to keep their believers
in a constant state of ignorance to keep em coming back. They don't ask,
but require every member to give them 3 or more hours of their life
every week which increases with whatever calling they give, they aren't
the least bit entertaining, they require 10% of your gross household
income even when you can't afford to put food on the table, and require
you to never question anything they say or else you're cut off. Contrast
that with our podcast of accessible Mormon history. We kindly ask for an
hour or two out of your week during your commute or workout solely for
entertainment purposes, we ask for 4 dollars a month (just the price of
a coffee), but if you're a student, on a fixed income or otherwise can't
afford it then don't worry about it, and constantly provide and ask you
to check our sources to make sure I don't get anything wrong or mistaken
lie to you in any way by telling you a fictionalized version of Mormon
history. Granted, their system is more sustainable and they have a
multiple billion dollar's worth worldwide religion to show for it, but I
like to think our system leaves the freedom of choice up to you and
relies on your kindness, instead of your servitude. Plus, if you stop
listening to this podcast, it's a bummer and I hope it's not due to
anything I said, but you won't lose your job, family, and entire way of
life for doing so. So, if you think it's a good idea to be part of this
movement and want to see us continue this crusade against demonstrable
lies orchestrated by a massive corporation disguised as a religion, we'd
really appreciate it if you considered pledging a dollar or two per
episode on patreon.com/nakedmormonism. As a thank you to our patrons,
you instantly gain access to tons of exclusive content, get to be part
of our patron only message boards where conversation is growing every
day, get to join in the monthly NaMo home evening google hangout, and
most importantly, you can finally count yourself among the ranks of the
NaMo family, officially joining the fight against this bigoted,
misogynistic, multinational religion, led almost exclusively by
disconnected white men who were born before the great depression. There
isn't much time left before the live show to be inducted into our Book
of Exaltation, so if you've been a fence-sitter during these pitches for
the last few episodes, now's a good time to act on that altruistic urge,
and also get some bang for your buck while you're at it with the patreon
exclusive feed.

Our loving court systems have decided that money is speech, so if this
podcast speaks to you in some way or you want to add your voice to the
fight, consider tossing some money our way.

With that, let's jump into the show.

When we last left off our historical timeline, Jo was barking some final
instructions to the quorum of the Twelve before they began their long
journey for England. Jo told us some very magical tests to determine
whether or not a spirit is a resurrected being and whether it was sent
by God or the Devil. I should add that the very appearance of these
individuals from the earliest spiritual manifestations in Jo's life was
a concept mired in occult and magic signs and tokens. For example, the
unnamed angel which first appeared to Jo in September of 1823 was all
clothed in white and appeared 3 times in one night, those are magical
indications that Jo was practicing white magic, good magic, if you will,
as opposed to dark magic. Jo's magic world view was inextricably tied to
his theology and everything that became Mormonism, and his understanding
of the world had direct influences on the beliefs of the early Mormons,
some of which have been preserved in church practices today.

After Jo gave us his litmus test for determining what a spirit is, we
picked up Bloody Brigham Young's manuscript history as he departed
Illinois with the rest of the quorum of the Twelve to make their way
towards England. This was a two-year mission, and by the time Bloody
Brigham returned to Nauvoo, it was a sprawling metropolis, where it had
been nothing but an inhabitable swamp when they left. By late October
1839, Bloody Brigham and the rest of the quorum had made it to Kirtland
Ohio to visit some old friends who used to follow Jo but didn't make the
move to Missouri. They remained there for a little while before boarding
a steamer for Buffalo New York.

At the same time this was happening, Jo was preparing to depart Commerce
to begin his long journey to the White house to meet with President
Martin Van Buren in application for redress concerning what the Saints
had suffered in Missouri. The motivations for this meeting are probably
too complicated to truly understand, but we do know that Jo needed a lot
of money to fulfill the contracts he was signing to purchase the tens of
thousands of acres on which the saints were settling in Illinois and
Iowa. But Jo likely wasn't just doing it for the money, he may have been
trying to save a little bit of face too. Think about it, the Mormons
were completely screwed over in Missouri and they felt wronged for what
had happened. What better way to turn the persecution complex real than
by getting a huge payout from the government for being chased from
Missouri? Unfortunately, everybody in the situation could see through
the plea, and the Mormons weren't particularly popular on a national
level, so siding with them could mean the end of a political career.
We'll bite into that during the meat.

To wrap up last episode, we talked with Ryan McKnight for a new
recurring segment called Mormon Leaks Minute, where Ryan comes on
occasionally to discuss new or important leaks coming from the church.
We finished with talking about Savannah's testimony and Mormon and
Gay.lds.org, covering the church's current stance on LGBTQ issues.

That's a nice splash of milk to get us started, let's devour the meat.

Before Jo could depart Commerce for his trip to Washington D.C., a few
items of business needed attending. Since the foundation of the church
on April 6^th^, 1830, there were always semi-annual meetings, which
continue to this day, known as general conference. Jo didn't immediately
leave for D.C. when the quorum of the Twelve left for their mission to
England, he stuck around a little longer to set up some infrastructure
prior to his departure, likely in hopes that he wouldn't return from
D.C. to a whole new church led by some untrusted usurper who may have
been lurking in the ranks of trusted church leaders. Beginning on
Saturday, October 5^th^, Jo held the usual semi-annual general church
conference, where he appointed a number of trusted individuals to church
offices.

Picking up from the Dan Vogel Source and Text Critical edition of the
History of the Church, vol 4 pg 11:

"The meeting was opened by prayer by President Joseph Smith, jr.; after
which he was appointed President, and James Sloan, Clerk of the
Conference, by a unanimous voice of the meeting. The President then
spoke at some length upon the situation of the church; the difficulties
they have had to contend with; and the manner in which they had been led
to this place; and wished to know the views of the brethren whether they
wished to appoint this a stake or not; stating that he believed it to be
a good place, and suited for the Saints. It was then unanimously agreed
upon that it should be appointed a stake and a place of gathering for
the Saints.

The following officers were then appointed,\--namely, William Marks to
be President; Bishop Whitney to be Bishop of middle ward; Bishop
Partridge to be Bishop of upper ward; Bishop Knight to be Bishop of
lower ward; George W. Harris, Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, David
Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington, Thomas Grover, Newel
Knight, Charles C. Rich, David Dort, Seymour Brunson, Lewis D. Wilson,
to be High Council; who being respectfully called upon accepted their
appointment.

It was then voted that a Branch of the church be established on the
other side of the river, in Iowa Territory; over which Elder John Smith
was appointed President; Alanson Ripley, Bishop; and Asahel Smith, John
M. Burke, Abraham Owen Smoot, Richard Howard, Willard Snow, Erastus
Snow, David Pettigrew, Elijah Fordham, Edward Fisher, Elias Smith, John
Patten, Stephen Chase, were elected High Council. Don C. Smith was
elected to be continued as President of the High Priesthood. Orson Hyde
to stand in his former office, and William Smith to be continued in his
standing...

(From later on page 13)

Those persons who had been baptized, were then confirmed, and several
children received blessings by Elders Cutler, Bent, and Brunson, Elder
Lyman Wight then addressed the meeting on the subject of raising funds
by contribution, towards paying for the lands, which had been contracted
for, as a settlement for the church, after which, contributions were
received for that purpose.

Judge Elias Higbee was appointed to accompany Presidents Joseph Smith,
jr., and Sidney Rigdon, to the City of Washington."

That sets our scene for who will be running the church in Jo's absence,
as well as who would accompany Jo to D.C. to help with talking to
President Van Buren about recourse for the Saints. But, prior to
actually departing, this passage made its way into the original
conference minutes, but was removed prior to publishing the History of
the Church in the Times and Season.

"On motion of Elder Lyman Wight it was Resolved that Prest. Joseph Smith
be authorized to deed property to his family, his father's family, and
the poor for their support during life, to fall to their heirs and
successors after them, as he shall deem proper."

This single paragraph gave a ton of power to Jo, especially as he was
about to depart to meet with the POTUS to get some money or property,
which had been lost in Missouri, from the government. If the meeting
went as Jo had hoped, President Van Buren would have given hundreds of
thousands of dollars in property or monetary relief to the church, which
means this passage would put all that property and money in Jo's name to
do with what he pleased, including, but not limited to, giving chunks of
it away to his closest friends and family members at whatever price he
saw fit. Jo definitely had a vested interest in his meeting with the
POTUS going well, because, if successful, he'd be one of the richest men
in Illinois.

This is an incredible amount of power to hand to somebody who's always
hungry for more power, especially given how much property and money was
expected to come into possession of the church very soon if the meeting
with Van Buren went well. But, it shouldn't be surprising that this
happened as similar things had happened everywhere the church resided
during Jo's history. I mean, the first quarrel between Jo and Oliver
Cowdery, Cowdung Allover as we know him, was due to Ollie's response to
Jo giving a revelation saying that he and Emma should be sustained by
the church. Jo always had his hands in money that was designated for the
church, but he simply couldn't resist it. Now Jo's insatiable hunger for
the kind of money the crazy rich preachers in his day were pulling in,
could be momentarily satisfied with everything being put in his
possession.

This is how Jo built Nauvoo on credit. He was signing a bunch of land
purchase agreements in his name, using church funds to purchase the
land, then he would turn around and sell the plots to the starving
Mormon refugees once they'd decided on a plot in Illinois or Iowa they
liked. I'm not sure how this is illegal, but it seems like some fishy
stuff was going on with Jo as treasurer in chief for the church and city
of Commerce, especially because he was putting everything in his name
again, just like he'd done in Ohio, which landed him in court with a
thousand dollar fine.

With this newly instilled executive power, along with the reorganization
of the church hierarchy to keeps things in check during his absence, Jo
set to depart for Washington D. C. These are the meeting minutes
included on page 17 dated for Monday October 28^th^, 1839 of the Dan
Vogel history of the church:

"Voted that the recommends drawn by Elder Sherwood, recommending,
constituting, and appointing Joseph Smith, jr., Sidney Rigdon, and Elias
Higbee, Delegates for the Church, to importune the President, and
Congress of the United States for redress, &c., be signed by this
Council...

Later on page 19,

"Tuesday, 29^th^.---I left Navuoo in a two-horse carriage for the city
of Washington, to lay before the Congress of the United States, the
grievances of the Saints in Missouri, accompanied by Sidney Rigdon,
Elias Higbee, and Orin P. Rockwell.---Passing through Carthage, we
stayed at Judge Higbee's over night, and the next day we arrived at
Quincy."

Just like we read from Bloody Brigham's manuscript history last episode,
Jo's accounts of their travels are punctuated nearly every other day by
saying some people were sick. Travel was slow going with Rigdon,
Pistol-Packin Port, and Robert Foster constantly throwing their guts up.
The carriage rides were taxing on the few in this small group who were
very ill. A lot of focus sits on Rigdon's sickness during this trip.

From Saturday, November 2^nd^, from Dan Vogel's history of the church:

"Continued our journey, and during the day put up with a friend on the
bank of the Illinois river, so that Doctor Foster who had accompanied us
so far for that purpose, might administer medicine to Mr. Rigdon again."

After 2 and a half weeks of lugging around the sickly Rigdon and
Pistol-packin Port, Jo decided they were too far behind schedule to
reach D.C. at any reasonable time. This schedule was probably largely
contingent upon the time of year. It was November and the 1800-mile
roundtrip journey to D.C. and back needed to be completed before Jo and
friends were stuck in winter weather conditions. Realizing this time
restraint, Jo took drastic measures upon reaching Columbus Ohio, which
was pretty much halfway between Nauvoo and D.C. This is how it reads
from the History of the Church:

"Monday, \[Nov.\] 18^th^.---President Young visited brother R. Potter at
Newbury, and returned on Tuesday to Kirtland.

About this time we had arrived near Columbus, when the roads were so
bad, Elder Rigdon's health so poor, and the time so fast spending, when
it was necessary for the committee to be in Washington, that I started
in the stage with Judge Higbee on the most expeditious route to
Washington City, leaving Rockwell, Rigdon, and Foster, to come on at
their leisure in the carriage."

Jo left these guys behind and continued on to D.C. with only Elias
Higbee accompanying him. It's important to note that some of the details
of this trip are a complete mystery to historians, which Vogel explains
really well in a footnote concerning the entire D.C. trip.

"The account of JS's trip to Washington, from 29 Oct. 1839 to 4Mar.
1840, was reconstructed...from undetermined source(s). The account
concludes with the complaint: "I \[JS\] depended on Dr. \[Robert D.\]
Foster to keep my daily journal during this journey, but he has failed
me." A canceled passage...reads "& many dates are lost through his
neglect, or that he has never made any returns." In a letter to Foster
dated 11 Mar.. 1840, JS mentioned: "I want to get hold of your journal
very much". This evidently was never accomplished. In a letter to Joseph
Smith III, dated 14 Feb. 1874, Foster recounted his trip to Washington
with JS and mentioned that he still possessed "many incidents, dottings
and jottings, taken during our journey". Yet, some of \[the\]
reconstruction seems too detailed to have been surmised..."

It continues on for a minute, but that was the important part to
include. This trip to D.C. is fairly mysterious to historians reading
through the surviving documents, but we do know the point of the trip,
the time period during which it happened, as well as the outcome of the
meeting with President Van Buren. We also know that Jo spoke a lot on
the history of the church and his divine calling during this trip. He
was going around to places where some Mormons may have been living, or
even where Mormonism was a subject of interest for the locals. People
wanted to hear his claim to fame which was largely shrouded in mystery
during this time as Smith's own narrative hadn't been widely publicized
prior to this point. Luckily for us, during much of Jo's trip and
subsequent speeches, Orson Brain-Powered Pratt, an incredibly
intelligent and scientific mind, was making his trip across the country
with Jo until they were forced to part ways to continue their respective
missions.

It was during these public talks that Orson Pratt recounted Jo's history
the way he'd heard it parroted so many times by Jo. Pratt's writings
were compiled together and published in 1840 in Edinburgh during this
major missionary trip to England under the title of "Interesting Account
of Several Remarkable Visions, and of the Late Discovery of Ancient
American Records". Subsequently, some of the language which Pratt used
to recount Jo's history finds its way verbatim into the History of the
Church version of Jo's account. I'm just pointing out causal correlation
between what Jo was preaching at the time and what Pratt recounted as
coming from Jo's mouth. Pratt's pamphlet was also a source used by many
missionaries of his time and has also been used sparingly in our modern
time to instruct hungry missionaries who want to read early missionary
tracts used by early missionaries. Pratt's version of Jo's history was
crucial to getting the story straight from then on. Quick side-note, if
you're a supporter on patreon, this episode won't be extended, but you
will see two shorter episodes this week where I read through the
pamphlet and analyze it in comparison to church history before and after
it was published. That's just my little way of saying thank you for
supporting the show and giving those who pay for premium content more of
what they want; content.

Back to it. During September and October of 1839, the church purchased a
printing press and began to finally circulate the Mormon periodical,
Times and Season, along with a few other smaller scale projects.
Unfortunately, the printing needs for the church far outweighed the
capacity of this little print shop, and the Mormons were forced to
outsource a few of their largest projects on the docket. At this time,
the church was about to begin publishing its newest edition of their
proprietary hymn book, along with the 1840 edition of the Book of
Mormon. Those were huge projects which couldn't be undertaken by the
dinky little shop in Commerce because it was busy establishing itself
and printing the new Times and Seasons. P-Cubed Parley Parker Pratt,
while on the first leg of his journey towards England sent a letter to
Jo illustrating just how desperate they were for getting out printed
materials to the Mormon congregations he was visiting in America prior
to departure. The letter reads in part from the Dan Vogel history of the
church:

"We realize that your press and materials &c in the west were not at
present sufficient for so large a work. We have a printer here who does
most of our work. He is a fine man, and thorough in his business. He
works very cheap and paper is also cheap. We have also \[a\] book binder
who does a thorough business, is very reasonable, and a fine man to deal
with...

We are instructed to write to you immediately requesting leave to
publish the Book of Mormon say, two or three thousand copies. If you
will write to us immediately and grant us this privilege, we hereby
assure you that it shall be done exactly correct and with the utmost
care and diligence and on any terms which will best suit you, and secure
to you the profits which may arise...

We will give you one hundred dollars on each thousand copies for the
right of publishing, or we will give you one hundred Books on each
thousand. Or we will publish it on commission and return you all the
profits after defraying the expenses of the same together with a
reasonable charge for our time. Or, we will publish it on any other
conditions which you can reasonably propose.

Please write immediately and let us know and in the meantime we will be
getting ready and seeking for means...

If you would appoint a periodical to be published in this city, it can
be done immediately and thousand\[s\] would circulate here, where one
would circulate from the west. They are so slow and uncertain in coming
from there to us. I would also suggest for you considerations that the
publication of the Book of Mormon in Europe in English, French, German,
and other languages, be committed to the Twelve, as a committee who
shall take charge of the same and whose duty it shall be to secure to
you the copy rights in the several governments, and to render strict
account from time to time to the first presidency..."

Jo received this letter and we'll discuss what he did with the
information in shortly upcoming episodes, because soon after this letter
was written, Jo finally made it to Washington D.C. with Elias Higbee,
with Hingepin Rigdon close behind him. The passage says specifically
that He arrived in Washington City on the morning of Thursday, 28^th^
November 1839. Unfortunately for Jo, he didn't plan his meeting with
Congress and the President before departing, and you can't just walk
into a meeting with Congress, so Jo had his meeting with the President
and then had to hang out in D.C. for another month and a half before he
could be heard by Congress, during which time Rigdon was making his way
towards D.C. to join Jo and Higbee.

We don't have the meeting minutes from when Jo met with the President,
but we know that he and Elias Higbee were alone with the POTUS and the
meeting didn't go as planned. Jo presented the complaints to Martin Van
Buren and this is what he wrote to the church in response to the
meeting.

DV HoC pg 40

"Dear Brother Hyrum, President, and to the Honorable High Council of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints---to whom be fellowship,
love, and the peace of Almighty God extended, and the prayer of faith
forever and ever: Amen.

On Friday morning, 29^th^ \[Nov\], we proceeded to the house of the
President. We found a very large and splendid palace, surrounded with a
splendid enclosure, decorated with all the fineries and elegancies of
this world. We went to the door and requested to see the President; when
we were immediately introduced into an upper apartment, where we met the
President and were introduced into his parlor, where we presented him
with our letters of introduction. As soon as he had read one of them, he
looked upon us with a kind of half frown and said, \["\]What can I do? I
can do nothing for you! If I do anything, I shall come in contact with
the whole State of Missouri\["\].

But we were not intimidated; and demanded a hearing, and constitutional
rights. Before we left him he promised to reconsider what he had said,
and observed that he felt to sympathize with us on account of our
sufferings.

**Now we shall endeavor to express our feelings and views concerning the
President, as we have been eye-witnesses of his Majesty. He is a small
man, sandy complexion, and ordinary features; with frowning brow, and
considerable body, but not well proportioned as to his arms and legs;
and to use his own words, is "quite fat". On the whole we think he is
without body or parts, as no one part seems to be proportioned to
another;\--therefore instead of saying body and parts, we say body and
part, or partyism if you please to call it. And in fine, to come
directly to the point, he is so much a fop or a fool (for he judged our
cause before he knew it) we could find no place to put truth into him.**

**We do not say the Saints shall not vote for him, but we do say
boldly,...that we do not intend he shall have our votes.**

For God's sake brethren, be wide awake, and arm us with all the power
possible, for now is the time or never. We want you should get all the
influential men you can of that section of country, of Iowa, and of
every other quarter, to write letters to the members of Congress, using
their influence in our behalf, and to keep their minds constantly upon
the subject.

Yours in the bonds of the everlasting covenant:

Joseph Smith, jr.,

Elias Higbee"

Hingepin Rigdon was 5 days away in Pennsylvania during this meeting. Say
what you want about Jo and how great of an orator he was, but he could
never hold a candle to Rigdon. Think back to the February hearing less
than a year before this. Jo, Rigdon, Hyrum, and the others who were
interred in Liberty jail petitioned the judge to let them leave on a
writ of habeas corpus. Jo and the others plead their case and were
thrown back in jail, but Rigdon got on the stand and moved the entire
audience to tears with his tales of the Mormon persecution and was
promptly released from prison. He had an incredible ability to change
minds with the powers of emotive arguments, and I have to think that
this meeting may have gone differently had Rigdon been the guy talking
to President Van Buren instead of Jo being their advocate. There's
something to be said about playing your best hand, even if that means
waiting an extra 5 days to get ahold of all the cards to make it a
killer hand.

The way I picture this meeting going was Jo walked in to the oval office
and told the president that he needs to hear of the persecution the
Mormons had been suffering at the hands of Governor Lilburn Boggs,
telling him of all the property the Saints lost and should be
compensated for. However, it was presented to Van Buren by Jo, Van
Buren's reaction is indicative of what was said in the discussion. The
primary refutation he had against Jo's case was, if Van Buren does
anything to help the Saints, he would be siding with the Mormons and
lose all of Missouri in the next election. The conversation was focused
on what Van Buren could do for the Mormons to help them out, and his
severe lack of empathy shows that Jo was probably focused on presenting
his problems to Van Buren in hopes of instilling a sense of justice.

But, Rigdon was much more focused on motivating people based on emotion,
not logic and justice. Had Rigdon presented the Mormons' case to Van
Buren, he may have been able to convince the President that the Mormons
had been treated poorly in Missouri for the half decade they'd been
settling there. They may be deluded religious fanatics, but they're
still people, and they were chased from their homes and remain sick and
dying in refugee camps. Van Buren could be a hero for saving the Mormons
from the persecution they'd suffered if he just provided some form of
relief. If Van Buren wanted a chance to take Illinois in a sweep during
the next election, there were over 10,000 Mormon votes he could have as
a bloc if he but just helped a little with the troubles they'd
experienced. He didn't need to pay the \$200 grand Jo was asking for,
but some little olive branch like a small Mormon stimulus package for
settling in Illinois would make him a hero among the Mormons and not
cause Missouri to hate him for helping the deluded zealots. A compromise
could have been reached, but given Van Buren's whole rejection of Jo's
proposal, I feel like Jo sold it as an all or nothing proposal to the
President, which was ended with nobody satisfied and the Mormons hating
the government even more.

But Jo wasn't finished with pleading to the government for help. As
there exists a tri-lateral balance between chapters of government, Jo
tried to go over the President's head by petitioning congress with a
writ of complaints for what the Mormons suffered. Unfortunately,
Congress was on winter recess when Jo, Higbee, and Rigdon got into town,
so they had to wait to appear in front of congress.

Sitting back and looking at how this meeting went down causes me to muse
a bit on motivation, hopefully you don't mind a bit of a personal
digression to finish up the history for today. What is it that truly
motivates us? There were a million ways that this meeting with the
President could have gone wrong, but probably only a couple ways to get
it right. It obviously went one of the million wrong ways because the
Mormons were never paid for what happened in Missouri, but thinking
about the possible ways this could have been pitched to the President to
get a more favorable outcome is a fascinating mental exercise. What
could Jo have said to motivate the President to realistically consider
his proposal?

I think the primary problem was that Martin Van Buren found out he was
going to have a meeting with the Mormons, which undoubtedly colored his
perspective of the conversation from the get-go. And that's possibly the
foundation of why he was so apathetic. He viewed the Mormons as thems.
They were an outside group which the majority of the country was either
ignorant of or opposed to. He probably didn't have any friends who were
Mormons or Mormon sympathizers which only added to the fact that he
considered them something of a different species almost.

In order to motivate the President, I think Jo needed to bridge the gap
between Mormons and anti-Mormons. That's what would cause the President
to see things through his eyes, and possibly even empathize with the
plight of the average Mormon family who'd suffered through everything Jo
dragged them through. Because, at the end of the day, that's the point.
The Mormons, who'd been with Jo during the best and worst of times, 1839
being truly the worst of times, they were all just people who happened
to believe in some crazy shit. They were people who'd lost all their
money after putting it in the KSS anti banking company at God's command.
They were people who'd become religious refugees at God's command.
They'd encountered ecstatic experiences and had seen angels flying
around the rafters of the temple at God's command. These Mormons had
gone through hell and back, all at God's command, proving they were good
and truly devout people who were led by a gigantic piece of human waste
without the least bit of true empathy for the suffering he'd caused
these people. If Jo truly had empathy for the trials and tribulations of
the Mormons, he wouldn't have done most of what he did, and everything
he did wouldn't include some self-serving byproduct as it always
inevitably did.

Jo couldn't convey to the President that these Mormons were European
Americans, just like him, who were in desperate need of help. They were
starving, they were dying from sickness, and nobody had any crops in the
ground to weather the doomridden impending winter ahead. The Mormons had
a bad hand, and Jo was the dealer. But each and every one of them had
their own story and had walked their own path to land them in these dire
straits. Each Mormon family wasn't responsible for the troubles they
were going through, but it's easy to label all of them as deluded
religious fanatics which somehow shifts the blame to the collective
credulity of herd mentality. But it's a lot easier to make hard
decisions concerning a group of people when you don't see a single one
of their faces. Had Governor Lilburn Boggs gone to either of the
Missouri Mormon strongholds himself to meet some of the people who were
called the Mormons, it may have been a lot harder for him to sign the
extermination order, because it was much easier for his mind to otherize
the Mormons when none of them had faces.

Progress isn't made when we put people into the "other" category. I'm
often asked, "why do you do what you do when Mormons are such nice
people?" Yeah, they may believe in a blatant falsehood, but they're nice
people. Why would you think I have something against Mormons? I have
nothing but good to say about Mormons, because they're my friends and
family. Every Mormon I've ever met has a face and a story, and I only
have good memories of my life in Mormonism due to the good people I was
surrounded by. This crusade isn't against Mormons, it's against
Mormonism, there's a meaningful distinction between the two. I don't
call out falsehoods perpetuated by deluded people, I call out falsehoods
perpetuated by a systematic cult which causes its followers to say and
believe in demonstrable falsehoods. That's how we bridge the gap between
Mormons and ex-Mormons, by acknowledging that there is no real gap, only
a gap in our perceptions of each other.

But like any other hallucination, just because that gap isn't real,
doesn't mean it isn't real to those who perceive it. My inbox is
inundated with emails from people who don't believe in Mormonism, but
they can't jump the proverbial gap because their entire life is wrapped
up in Mormonism; the gap from belief to non-belief is very real to those
people. Once a person leaves the church, the perceived gap left in their
wake is very real to them because they lost precious friends and family
to it. Until the secular community builds the infrastructure that people
leave behind when they transition out of Mormonism, that gap will always
be a very real thing to those who are intimidated by its presence. And
maybe this is a pipedream, but after the weekend I had with my friends
at Scathing Atheist and God Awful movies and the crowd the live show
drew to Seattle, I'm very hopeful for the current progress and the
future outlook of the secular community.

Real progress is made when we acknowledge that a group of people are
beholden to a beliefs system which causes pain and suffering in ways
which are unquantifiable, all while they're completely oblivious to the
phenomenon. This systematic desensitizing to Mormon's own cult mentality
was captured well by the son of George Q. Cannon named Frank J. Cannon
when he said:

"\[Mormons\] live under an absolutism. They have no more right of
judgment than a dead body. Yet the diffusion of authority is so clever
that nearly every man seems to share in its operation\... and feels
himself in some degree a master without observing that he is also a
slave."

The dehumanization of, and utter lack of empathy for, the suffering
Mormons by President Martin Van Buren marks the end of 1839 for our
purposes. The quorum of the Twelve were on their way to New York to hop
on a ship bound for England. Jo and Rigdon were stuck in Washington D.C.
for another month and a half awaiting a meeting with Congress, and the
saints were just beginning to understand Illinois winters without
anything but their wagons for shelter, and no food to sustain them. The
winter of 1839-1840 was a bitter and trying time for thousands of
people, all of whom were led to do incredible and stupid things because
of their belief in one charismatic guy who only cared about himself and
his own best interests.

What you're about to hear is part 2 of a conversation I had with Molly
UnMormon of the Doubting Dogma podcast. The first part, which you'll
have to listen to in the Doubting Dogma feed was a conversation we had
with Marissa McCool of Inciting incident podcast, it was a really fun
conversation. But for part 2, Molly UnMormon asked me to bring some
notes on the Martin and Willie handcart companies, which we discussed
for quite some time. The first part of the conversation you're about to
hear begins with me dominating the conversation presenting my knowledge
of the handcart companies, then we go on to discuss some other topics in
Mormonism. If you enjoy this segment, be sure to hop over to Doubting
Dogma and give Molly a quick subscribe to keep her doing the podcast,
you'll find the necessary links in the show notes. Also, I was on
Inciting Incident's episode 99, which is hosted by Marissa McCool and
occasionally some other awesome folks, so check the show notes for that
episode as well. Finally, be sure to listen to this week's scathing
atheist and God Awful Movies to hear a little bit about Jo drugging his
followers and some special brownies the GAMcrew partook of on stage live
in Seattle.

Without further ado, this is my conversation with Molly UnMormon on
Doubting Dogma podcast.
