---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 66 - God Mode Jo
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-66-god-mode-jo/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-66-god-mode-jo
libsyn_embed: 5696626

category: History
date: 2017-08-31 18:26:16 PDT
---

8-31-17

Ep 66 – God Mode Jo

On this episode, Jo, Bennett (Brokeit), and Thompson, join forces to
draft the Nauvoo Charter for approval by the Illinois State Legislature.
We read right through the whole thing because that’s how we roll on this
show. The Charter was essentially a copy and paste of the Springfield
City Charter, but there were a few subtle additions which enshrined the
city of Nauvoo as a sanctuary to Jo and the Mormons, and created a
separate military arm, the Nauvoo Legion, as the law enforcement agency
through which Jo exercised nothing short of martial law under the banner
of his newly founded theocracy. Jo was untouchable.

Links:

Nauvoo Charter  
<https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Nauvoo_Charter>

Robert Flanders’ Nauvoo  
<https://www.amazon.com/Nauvoo-Mississippi-Robert-Bruce-Flanders/dp/0252005619>

Tanner Barker’s blog  
<https://diligenceovertime.blogspot.com/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Last episode we released a mini-episode with Ryan about a recent Mormon
leak about a mission president denying communication access to his son
on his mission in the Houston Texas area, which is currently being
properly smote by Hurricane Harvey. We really hope that whatever happens
as the story continues to develop that the best will come of this
terrible situation, whatever that “best” happens to be. According to
Ryan, it sounds like this guy was eventually able to track down his son,
in spite of the Mission president’s efforts to keep them separated.
We’ll keep everybody updated if anything new develops in the story.

But let’s jump back into our historical timeline, there’s so much to
discuss. The last time we were discussing church history, things were in
a similar melancholy tenor as we spent much of the time talking about
the constant death and sickness ravaging the early destitute Mormon
settlement of Commerce. Joseph Sr., along with Bishop Edward Party-Boy
Partridge, and some other prominent members of the church since the
earliest days succumbed to the tormenting sickness and perished in the
foundational days of the Nauvoo church. To make matters worse, this was
at a time when Jo and Hyrum were wanted by the Missouri government for
skipping out on Jail during their transfer to Boone county a year prior
and there were writs issued for their arrest. Somehow, John Bennett, was
able to keep off the arresting officers for just long enough for Jo and
Hyrum to attend their father’s deathbed blessings he conferred on their
heads, wherein he transferred the power of Patriarch over the church to
Hyrum. There’s an important syntactical distinction to make here as it
would come into play in 1844. Big Daddy Cheese, Joseph Sr., was
Patriarch *over* the church, not patriarch *to* the church. This was an
office to be passed down through the Smith lineage alone, and served as
a point of contention upon Jo and Hyrum’s deaths. Keep that in mind as
we approach the 1844 schism grenade.

After discussing the death of Joseph Smith, we caught up with Bloody
Brigham Young and the progress of the quorum of the Twelve on their
mission in England. They were having incredible success which would only
dramatically accelerate in the upcoming decade and a half.

Before we get to the meat, just a heads up, this episode doesn’t have an
extended edition for patrons only, but if you are a patron subscriber,
you’ll see another episode right next to this one in the feed. I’m
picking up on an old project I started in March of 2015. For patrons
only, I began reading D-Day David Whitmer’s “An Address to All Believers
in Christ,” but finishing reading it on air completely slipped my mind
until very recently. This may be better to read it now though because we
know what happened on D-Day to David Whitmer so it offers a little
context wherein Whitmer wrote the book in the first place. This will be
the patron only episodes for the next few weeks, and the book is full of
A LOT of historical gems through D-Day David’s perspective. So, if you
support the show through patreon, thank you, and I hope you enjoy the
next few weeks of reading that incredible publication.

Let’s wipe off that milk moustache and pick up our bibs for some meat.

One thing I’ve come to grips with is just how fast we move through the
historic timeline in this show. Such a claim may baffle you who’ve been
listening for the near three years we’ve been running as it’s taken that
long to move through the 35 years of Jo’s life up to this point, but
really, there’s so much we don’t cover and so many people we don’t talk
about because it seems so inconsequential to the overall timeline and if
we talked about every little detail of church history, we’d probably
still be back in the Kirtland years right now and all of us would be
bored out of our skulls. The reason I bring this up and we’re starting
today’s show talking about this is because I have to tell you guys, I
miss a lot. I am no authority on Mormon history, nor am I a Mormon
historian, I just read the writings of accredited and trusted historians
and try to check and expand on their work by going back to as many
primary sources as possible. Built into the algorithm of how this show
works, I’m learning the history at the same pace all of you are in
listening to this show. I never want you to view me as somebody who’s
read and seen it all when it comes to Mormon history as the majority of
random Mormon history bloggers out there have studied church history
just as much or more than I have, and every one of them have their own
takes on the narrative, some more insightful than others, but none of
which are valueless. Even Dan Petersen’s frequent posts on FairMormon
and Deseret News offer some interesting insights from the apologist’s
perspective on church history. While I think his logic is often flawed
or wholly absent in his take on Joseph’s seer stone or the magical
inclinations of the entire Smith family, he does offer interesting takes
on church history, it just requires extra research and deeper dives to
see through his thinly veiled bullshit and heavy reliance on logical
fallacies and ad hominem attacks. On the opposite end of the spectrum,
you have blogs like my good friend Craig Keeling, who runs
WeirdMormonShit.com which is chock full of weekly posts of photoshopped
church officials doing various ungodly things, you should really think
about checking it out for a good laugh.

My point is, all of these viewpoints of Mormonism and Mormon history add
to the conversation, each side often seeing the other side’s
contributions to be of less or no value, but that’s not the case. All of
these perspectives add something to the conversation, and the value they
contribute is subjective to the consumer of the information.

This podcast is merely my contribution to the world of Mormonism and
Mormon history, and the value derived from it is subjective to you, the
one listening to my voice right now while you’re out running errands,
working, gardening, exercising, playing video games, or whatever it is
you do while consuming podcasts. In that respect, you wouldn’t listen to
this if you didn’t find value in it or find it interesting, so for
finding that value and interest, I want to personally thank you.

The whole reason I brought this up was to essentially ask for your
forgiveness. There are so many relevant things I’ve never even brought
up. There’s a whole gang of people I’ve never discussed at length or
have only made passing reference to who had a dramatic impact on the
historical timeline that deserve so much more investigation. I can try
to say that I’ve spared talking about these people or instances in depth
to spare you the boredom, and while that is often the case, much more
frequent of an offender in this regard is simply my own ignorance. I
don’t have a regimented structure of books I need to read to fulfill a
syllabus. I just pick up random Mormon books, read, and come away with a
whole new understanding based on what I just consumed.

Recently I’ve been burning through Robert Flanders “Nauvoo Kingdom on
the Mississippi”. I read a few passages from it when we introduced John
Brokeit a few episodes ago, but am only this past week actually diving
into the pages. This book is known as one of the seminal
historiographies of Nauvoo, trusted and recommended by the majority of
Mormon historians, and, the most important part, incredibly unbiased in
its treatment of church affairs. Needless to say, the book has offered
some very interesting insight and contextualized a lot of information in
a way that plays into the larger context of what happened during those 5
years the Mormons spent in Nauvoo. I’m giving a major recommendation of
this book, it has me on the edge of my seat. I’ll be relying on this
book and likely frequently sourcing it as we move through Nauvoo.

Today, we’re going to be discussing one of the main points that served
to divide the Mormons and the Illinoisans which heavily contributed to
the Mormons being removed from Nauvoo and chased to Utah beginning in
1845. In order to get into this topic, which will be the entire focus of
today’s episode, I have a quick question. How many of you are gamers?
This reference won’t appeal to everybody, but to those who get it, this
will color the conversation for today. My favorite game type is open
world type games. Grand Theft Auto has been one of my favorite
franchises for over a decade. One of the most fun aspects of Grand Theft
Auto are the cheat codes that allow you to do all kinds of remarkable
things like spawning cars and weapons, making vehicles fly, making
people riot on the streets and on and on it goes. However, there is one
cheat in Grand Theft Auto, Saints Row, Crackdown and a bunch of other
games which seems great when you first use it, but eventually you
realize it’s really not all that great. That cheat is known as God mode.
God mode gives you all the guns and equipment, unlimited money and
points for upgrading the character, and most importantly, invincibility.
You simply can’t be touched. Bullets turn into marshmallows and falls
from the tops of buildings become a step off a curb.

God mode is great for a while. You wreak havoc on the city, squash every
foe, destroy every altercation with the flick of the joystick, all while
the power of the death star aimed straight at your face couldn’t end
your fun. However, the fundamental flaw with the God mode cheat is
boredom amidst utter destruction. Most video games which invoke God mode
rely heavily upon destruction and chaos to make them fun, but when the
finitude of death and restarting from the last save point is removed,
mindless destruction becomes monotonous. The only way to break the
monotony is through creation instead of destruction, and very few games
have mastered creation with God Mode cheat on, Minecraft being a great
example. Once the finality of death or paying for consequences is
removed, unbridled limitless creation is truly the only thing which can
keep a God occupied.

During the October of 1840 conference, Jo, John Brokeit, and Robert B.
Thompson were tasked with drafting the Nauvoo charter to send it to the
Illinois state legislature for approval. Once approved, the small town
of Commerce would be officially endorsed by Illinois as the official
city of Nauvoo, Illinois. Putting the Nauvoo charter together was Jo and
Brokeit’s first cooperative task after Bennett moved to Commerce in late
August or early September, right before this October conference. It’s
likely that the charter was mostly drafted before the conference, but
Jo, Brokeit, and Thompson had to put the final touches on it.

The Nauvoo charter was basically a copy-paste job from the Springfield
Illinois charter, probably a good move as the phrasing was similar
enough to expedite the process of pushing it through the Illinois
legislature. Illinois was hungry for cities and businesses to crop up.
The Mormon high council voted on the Nauvoo charter during the October
conference and in its incomplete form was approved to send up to the
Illinois Twelfth General Assembly for approval.

From page 96 of Nauvoo by Robert Flanders:

“When the state legislature convened in December, 1840, General Bennett
was in Springfield as lobbyist for the proposed city and associated
charters. The circumstances of the legislative session were propitious
for their passage. The lawmakers were preoccupied with the state fiscal
crisis caused by the depression and the collapse of the heavily indebted
internal improvements programs. Furthermore, they were deluged with
requests to enact charters for incorporation of every conceivable sort,
of which the Nauvoo City bill was only one. Forty-seven acts of
incorporation were finally passed by the Twelfth General Assembly
including seven other city charters. But the legislators did not
overlook the fact that the Mormons represented a powerful political
bloc, which they were at that time disposed to serve. The young Stephen
A. Douglas, then Secretary of State and already a power in the Illinois
Democracy, lent his support to Bennett’s measure; so did Whig Senator
Sidney H. Little of McDonough County, which adjoined Hancock on the
east…

The hurried passage of the ill-examined charter owed much to political
expediency—Ford and the historian Frank Stevens sardonically assigned
this as the only reason—as well as to the inexperience and legal
incapacity of many legislators and the press of other business. But
beyond these circumstances, its routine enactment seems natural
considering the high optimism that prevailed in the state. Illinois was
growing and society was moving ahead. New counties, new cities and
towns, new institutions, new groups of every sort were springing up
across the state, clamoring for recognition, for legal status, for power
and political preferment. The tendency was to welcome them and to help
them; there was presumably room for all and a need for all. The Mormons
were desirable as an especially populous new group. The years 1839-1840
were something of an “Era of Good Feeling” between the Mormons and
Illinoisans…”

And now we see the power of Brokeit to help the Mormons with his
considerable experience in government and politics.

“Bennett’s role in promoting the enactment of the charter is not clear;
Ford accorded him considerable credit. ‘He flattered both sides with the
hope of Mormon favor,’ wrote the old governor, ‘and both sides expected
to receive their votes.’ While the charter might have passed without his
presence, Bennett was accorded both status and prestige by his new
Mormon brethren in thanks for the achievement. However, Joseph Smith
wrote in his journal, ‘The City Charter of Nauvoo is my own plan and
device; I concocted it for the salvation of the Church, and on
principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its
protective influence without distinction of sect or party.’”

The Nauvoo charter had some incredible provisions enshrined into law.
Remember this, the charter was very similar to the Springfield charter,
but had some interesting additions which made it unique and allowed
‘every honest man …\[to\]… dwell secure under its protective
influence,’ but also allowed dishonest men like Jo and Brokeit to dwell
and do pretty much anything they wanted under its protective influence.

We’re going to read through the Charter. There are a ton of
inconsequential clauses which we won’t spend any time on, but we need to
read through the important parts which had profound impacts throughout
the Nauvoo years. The entire document is available through wikisource,
and you’ll find a link in the show notes if you want to read through the
entire thing. This next section of the show may get a little dry, sorry
about that, but we need to read a bunch of these clauses because they
lay some crucial foundation for what Jo was able to do during the Nauvoo
years. Also keep in mind the entirety of church history up to this
point. There are historical reasons why Jo wrote some of these
provisions into the charter and we’ll try to briefly discuss them in
context as we go.

“Section 1. Be it enacted by the people of the State of Illinois,
represented in the General Assembly, that all that district of country
embraced within the following boundaries, to wit' beginning at the north
east corner of section thirty-one in Township seven, north of range
eight, west of the fourth principal meridian, in the county of Hancock,
and running thence west to the northwest corner of said section, thence
north to the Mississippi river, thence west to the middle of the main
channel of the said river; thence down the middle of said channel to a
Point due west of the southeast corner of fractional section number
twelve in township six, north of range nine, west of the fourth
principal meridian, thence east to the southeast corner of said section
twelve, theme north on the range line between township six north, and
range eight and nine west, to the southwest corner of section six in
township six north of range eight west, thence east to the southeast
corner of said section, thence north to the place of beginning,
including the town plats of Commerce and Nauvoo, shall hereafter be
called and known by the name of the "City of Nauvoo," and the
inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted a body corporate and politic
by the name aforesaid, and shall have perpetual succession, and may have
and use a common seal which they may change and alter at pleasure.

(Sets boundaries for the city and designates it as “Nauvoo”)

Sec. 2. Whenever any tract of land adjoining the "City of Nauvoo" shall
have been laid out into town lots, and duly recorded according to law,
the same shall form a part of the "City of Nauvoo."

Sec. 3. The inhabitants of said city, by the name and style aforesaid,
shall have power to sue and be sued, to plead and be impleaded, defend
and be defended, in all courts of law and equity, and all actions
whatsoever; to purchase, receive and hold property, real and personal,
in said city, to purchase, receive, and hold real property beyond the
city, for burying grounds, or for other public purposes, for the use of
the inhabitants of said city, to sell, lease, convey or dispose of
property, real or personal, for the benefit of the city, to improve and
protect such property, and to do all other things in relation thereto as
natural persons.

(This was a standard copy-paste from the Springfield charter which lays
the foundation of the legal processes the city would control. There’s
nothing really special about this, but it does put all executive and
legislative processes in control of the city and the city government
which is laid out in the next section)

Sec. 4. There shall be a City Council, to consist of a Mayor, four
Aldermen, and nine Councilors, who shall have the qualifications of
electors of said city, and shall be chosen by the qualified voters
thereof, and shall hold their offices for two years, and until their
successors shall be elected and qualified. The City Council shall judge
of the qualifications, elections and returns of their own members, and a
majority of them shall form a quorum to do business, but a smaller
number may adjourn from day to day, and compel the attendance of absent
members, under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.

Sec. 5. The Mayor, Aldermen and Councilors, before entering upon the
duties of their office, shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation
that they will support the Constitution of the United States, and of
this State and that they will well and truly perform the duties of their
offices to the best of their skill and abilities.

(These sections set out the structure for the city government. This is
where Nauvoo departs from most other city charters of its day. Most
cities had either Aldermen or Councilors, but usually not both. Nauvoo
established these groups of councilmen as sub groups operating under the
mayor, who essentially had complete executive power. That may not mean
much right now, but it will very soon. This Nauvoo charter essentially
put the Mayor’s powers on par with that of the Governor’s powers. Can
anybody guess who the mayor would be? We’ll get to it soon.)

Sec. 6. On the first Monday of February next, and every two years
thereafter, an election shall be held for the election of one Mayor,
four Aldermen, and nine Councilors; and at the first election under the
Act, three Judges shall be chosen viva voce by the electors present. The
said Judges shall choose two Clerks, and the Judges and Clerks, before
entering upon their duties, shall take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation such as is now required by law to be taken by Judges or
Clerks of other elections and at all subsequent elections, the necessary
number of Judges and Clerks shall be appointed by the City Council. At
the first election thus held, the polls shall be opened at 9 o'clock
a.m. and closed at 6 o'clock p.m,; at the close of the polls the votes
shall be counted and a statement thereof proclaimed at the front door of
the house at which said election shall be held; and the Clerks shall
leave with each person elected, or at his place of residence, within
five days after the election, a written notice of his election; and each
person so notified shall within ten days after the election take the
oath or affirmation hereinbefore mentioned, a certificate of which oath
shall be deposited with the Recorder, whose appointment is hereafter
provided for, and be by him preserved; and subsequent elections shall be
held, conducted and returns thereof made as may be provided for by
ordinance of the City Council.

(A term limit of 2 years was pretty standard. As I said before, this
charter was similar to many other city charters so it would be
rubber-stamped through the Illinois legislature without any hiccups.
What this did mean is fairly interesting though as it essentially made
it so whoever was running for these offices always had reelection on
their minds. If your seat is only guaranteed for 2 years, you try to do
whatever necessary to pander to your constituents for those 2 years to
keep your place and income secure.)

Sec. 7. All free white male inhabitants, who are of the age of twenty
one years, who are entitled to vote for State Officers, and who shall
have been actual residents of the city sixty days next preceding said
election, shall be entitled to vote for City Officers.

(This is only fascinating because the probationary limit for residency
was set so short to gain the ability to vote. They couldn’t make the
limit longer than 60 days because Nauvoo was growing so quickly and they
wanted people to feel as if their voices mattered so soon after moving
to town.)

Sec. 8. The City Council shall have authority to levy and collect taxes,
for city purposes, upon all property, real and personal, within the
limits of the city, one-half per cent per annum, upon the assessed value
thereof, and may enforce payment of the same in any manner, to be
provided by ordinance, not repugnant to the Constitution of the United
States or of this State.

Sec. 9. The City Council shall have power to appoint a Recorder,
Treasurer, Assessor, Marshal, Supervisor of streets, and all such other
officers as may be necessary, and to prescribe their duties and remove
them from office at pleasure.

Sec. 10. The City Council shall have power to require, of all officers
appointed in pursuance of this Act, bonds, with a penalty for the
faithful performance of their respective duties, such as may be deemed
expedient; and also to require all officers appointed as aforesaid, to
take an oath for the faithful performance of the duties of their
respective offices.

(Section 8, 9, and 10 set out the ability of the Nauvoo government to
collect taxes and instate or remove public officials at their will. It’s
not worth reading in detail as this was pretty standard practice.)

Sec. 11. The City Council shall have power and authority to make,
ordain, establish and execute all such ordinances, not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States or of this State, as they may deem
necessary for the peace, benefit, good order, regulation, convenience,
and cleanliness of said city: for the protection of property therein
from destruction by fire, or otherwise, and for the health and happiness
thereof: they shall have power to fill all vacancies that may happen by
death, resignation, or removal, in any of the offices herein made
elective; to fix and establish all the fees of the office of said
corporation not herein established; to impose such fines, not exceeding
one hundred dollars, for each offense, as they may deem just, for
refusing to accept any office under the corporation, or for misconduct
therein; to divide the city into wards; to add to the number of Aldermen
and Councilors, and apportion them among the several wards as may be
most just and conducive to the interests of the city.

(This is an interesting section and the phrasing leaves some loopholes
you could navigate a planet through. Giving the city power to enact
ordinances is necessary to establish any city, but the broad platitude
this sets out with saying they can’t be ‘repugnant to the Constitution
of the U.S.’ can be interpreted pretty loosely. It means that every
ordinance they passed needed to be interpreted through the lens of
constitutional Originalism, which was much more prevalent back then as
there was a fair amount less juris prudence compared to now, but how do
you evaluate a law that limits the practice of a certain business in
town only viewed through a constitutionalist lens? When Nauvoo passed an
ordinance to outlaw the sale of liquor within the city limits, couldn’t
somebody approach them and say my religion requires the use of alcohol
which would make the ordinance repugnant to the free exercise of
religion. That’s one example, but what if an ordinance was passed which
said that the city could levy a tax on anybody who doesn’t attend an
assembly of some sort on Saturday or Sunday. Or maybe the church doesn’t
have to pay property taxes on property it purchases for ecclesiastical
matters, which is current law, but Jo was using the church to buy
everything and sell it back to people settling in the area at a profit.
None of those ordinances could be interpreted as repugnant to the
constitution, affording a broad latitude of actions by Jo and other
public officials which could be considered legal, regardless of how
immoral those actions might have been. But this becomes more sinister as
we get further into the charter.)

Sec. 12. To license, tax, and regulate auctions, merchants, retailers,
grocers, hawkers, peddlers, butchers, pawnbrokers, and money-changers.

Sec. 13. The City Council shall have exclusive power within the city, by
ordinance, to license, regulate, and restrain the keeping of ferries; to
regulate the police of the city; to impose fines, forfeitures, and
penalties for the breach of any ordinance, and provide for the recovery
of such fines and forfeitures, and the enforcement of such penalties;
and to pass such ordinances, as may be necessary and proper for carrying
into execution the powers specified in this Act; provided such
ordinances are not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States or
of this State, and in fine to exercise such other legislative powers as
are conferred on the City Council of the City of Springfield, by an Act
entitled an Act to Incorporate the City of Springfield, approved
February 3rd, 1840.

(Section 12 and 13 lay out the city’s ability to enforce laws and
ordinances as well as grants exclusive power to license, regulate, and
restrain the use of ferries, meaning nobody could operate a private
ferry business inside the Nauvoo limits. This would be incredibly
important once the Mormons established their immigration system for
converts coming over from Europe as they would hold exclusive rights to
moving those people, which made Jo a very healthy profit in the near
future. There’s a breakdown of 39 sections later in the charter which
subdivide the actual legislative actions included in section 13. We
won’t read these as most of them are redundant and don’t offer any
insight above and beyond what is included in the sections we’re already
reading.)

Sec. 14. All ordinances passed by the City Council shall, within one
month after they shall have been passed, be published in some newspaper
printed in the city, or certified copies thereof be posted up in three
of the most public places in the city.

Sec. 15. All ordinances of the city may be proven by the seal of the
corporation, and when printed or published in book or pamphlet fog
purporting to be printed or published by authority of the corporation
the same shall be received in evidence in all courts or places without
further proof.

(Section 14 and 15 just say that once a city ordinance is passed it must
be posted in all available public places to make people aware of it and
also incorporate the ordinance immediately into the city’s court
system.)

Sec. 16. The Mayor and Aldermen shall be conservators of the peace
within the limits of said city, and shall have all the powers of
Justices of the Peace therein, both in civil and criminal cases, arising
under the laws of the State; they shall, as Justices of the Peace,
within the limits of said city, perform the same duties, be governed by
the same laws give the same bonds and security, as other Justices of the
Peace, and be commissioned as Justices of the Peace in and for said city
by the Governor.

(This basically made JoPs out of the Aldermen and the Mayor,
consolidating and granting a ton of judicial power to these two offices.
This section alone is no issue, but when it’s coupled with the following
section, the implications are absolutely incredible. Pay attention to
the power of Mayor in the next section, it essentially makes him out to
be the sole executive and judicial authority in Nauvoo, which may as
well have been its own nation-state with the system the Charter fully
constructs.)

Sec. 17. The Mayor shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all cases
arising under the ordinances of the corporation, and shall issue such
process as may be necessary to carry such ordinances into execution and
effect; appeals may be had from any decision or judgment of said Mayor
or Aldermen, arising under the city ordinances, to the Municipal Court
under such regulations as may be presented by ordinance; which court
shall be composed of the Mayor as Chief Justice, and the Aldermen as
Associate Justices, and from the final judgment of the Municipal Court
to the Circuit Court of Hancock county, in the same manner of appeals
are taken from judgments of the Justices of the Peace; provided that the
parties litigant shall have a right to a trial by a jury of twelve men
in all cases before the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court shall have
power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under the
ordinances of the City Council.

(That was a bit of gobbledy-gook, but let me put that into context for
you. One of the main issues which arises when trying to prosecute the
catholic church for any violations in any regard is the fact that they
operate as their own nation-state with their own set of laws. For
example, when a priest is convicted of child rape, as an off-the-wall
example, the Vatican can petition whatever country the priest is being
held in for extradition to bring him back to the Vatican, where they
undergo their own disciplinary actions under their own laws. There’s a
lot of nuance in this example, but it functions for the purposes of
illustrating the point. Essentially though, the Catholic church operates
world-wide under its own set of laws and ordinances which usually only
come into conflict with the laws of other countries when it comes to
convicting a serial child rapist. All executive power of the Vatican
falls under the Pope and his highest councilors.

Jo and Brokeit set up a similar structure with the last two clauses.
They set the Mayor as the single person with exclusive power in all
cases within the jurisdiction of Nauvoo. But that last line is the most
important which puts all the power into the rest of the clause. ‘The
Municipal court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all
cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council.’ A writ of
habeas corpus is basically a petition to have a prisoner released when
they’re being held without charge, at least that’s how it is frequently
used. This is the actual definition from criminal.findlaw.com “A **writ
of habeas corpus** (which literally means to "produce the body") is a
court order to a person or agency holding someone in custody (such as a
warden) to deliver the imprisoned individual to the court issuing the
order and to show a valid reason for that person's detention”

During Jo’s years before his high status in Nauvoo, he’d written a
number of these habeas corpus writs to get himself released from prison,
most were met with no success. While this line should have been
interpreted narrowly to only fall in the jurisdiction of Nauvoo, the
power was extended to all jurisdictions, and was used accordingly. What
that means is somebody living in Nauvoo or having a residence within the
city limits could be arrested anywhere in the country and the Nauvoo
Mayor could issue an approved writ of habeas corpus on behalf of the
imprisoned individual to have them extradited to Nauvoo to be tried
under its jurisdiction. This was Jo’s get out of jail free provision in
the Nauvoo Charter which really came in handy when he was arrested in
1843 under pesky charges of treason by the state of Missouri for that
whole 1838 scrape the Mormons had in Missouri. With this single item
being signed into law, Jo could be arrested anywhere in the country and
the mayor could immediately bring him back to Nauvoo and release him.
Guess who the mayor would be? We’ll find out soon.)

Sec. 18. The Municipal Court shall sit on the first Monday of every
month, and the City Council at such times and place as may be prescribed
by city ordinance; special meetings of which may at any time be called
by the Mayor or any two Aldermen.

(Section 18 just calls important meetings at regular intervals for all
the city government.)

Sec. 19. All process issued by the Mayor, Aldermen, or Municipal Court,
shall be directed to the Marshal, and, in the execution thereof, he
shall be governed by the same laws as are or may be prescribed for the
direction and compensation of constables in similar cases. The Marshal
shall also perform such other duties as may be required of him under the
ordinances of said city, and shall be the principal ministerial officer.

(Section 19 basically turned the city Marshal into the mayor’s private
enforcer. This was commonplace, but it is worth keeping in mind that the
Mayor had rule over the enforcement of all laws in Nauvoo, even when
those laws should have been enforced by a higher authority than the
Mayor, like by Governor Thomas Carlin.)

Sec. 20. It shall be the duty of the Recorder to make and keep accurate
records of all ordinances made by the City Council, and of all their
proceedings in their corporate capacity, which record shall at all times
be open to the inspection of the electors of said city, and shall
perform such other duties as may be required of him by the ordinances of
the City Council, and shall serve as Clerk of the Municipal Court.

(Section 20 basically says that the city Recorder should make and keep
accurate records of everything that happens in the city.)

Sec. 21. When it shall be necessary to take private property for the
opening, widening, or altering any public street, lane, avenue, or
alley, the corporation shall make a just compensation therefor to the
person whose property is to be taken, and if the amount of such
compensation cannot be agreed upon, the Mayor shall cause the same to be
ascertained by a jury of six disinterested freeholders of the city.

(Section 21 establishes the eminent domain powers of the Nauvoo
government to expropriate private property for the good of the city.
This is standard practice as well, but the usage of eminent domain could
be interpreted rather broadly in extenuating circumstances; like when a
private business, like ferry on the Mississippi, interfered with the
business interests of the city as a whole.)

Sec. 22. All jurors compelled to inquire into the amount of benefits or
damages that shall happen to the owners of property so proposed to be
taken, shall first be sworn to that effect, and shall return to the
Mayor their inquest in writing, signed by each juror.

(Section 22 limits the ability of jurors to know the value of property
involved in any legal case. I don’t know how this could be misused, but
it wouldn’t surprise me if a situation came up where this was a useful
little loophole to put in the charter.)

Sec. 23. In case the Mayor shall at any time be guilty of a palpable
omission of duty, or shall wilfully, and corruptly be guilty of
oppression, mal conduct, or partiality, in the discharge of the duties
of his office, he shall be liable to be indicted in the Circuit Court of
Hancock county, and on conviction he shall be fined not more than two
hundred dollars, and the Court shall have power on the recommendation of
the jury to add to the judgment of the Court that he be removed from
office.

(Section 23 was pretty standard practice, it’s essentially an
impeachment clause in case anybody steps out of line.)

Sec. 24. The City Council may establish and organize an institution of
learning within the limits of the city, for the teaching of the Arts,
Sciences, and Learned Professions, to be called the "University of the
City of Nauvoo," which institution shall be under the control and
management of a Board of Trustees, consisting of a Chancellor,
Registrar, and twenty-three Regents, which Board shall thereafter be a
body corporate and politic, with perpetual succession by the name of the
"Chancellor and Regents of the University of the City of Nauvoo," and
shall have full power to pass, ordain, establish, and execute, all such
laws and ordinances as they may consider necessary for the welfare and
prosperity of said University, its officers and students; provided that
the said laws and ordinances shall not be repugnant to the Constitution
of the United States, or of this State; and provided also, that the
Trustees shall at all times be appointed by the City Council, and shall
have all the powers and privileges for the advancement of the cause of
education which appertain to the Trustees of any other College or
University of this State.

(Section 24 established yet another school under the direction of church
authorities. Granted, it does explicitly say that this university will
be run by a Board of Trustees, but where do you think they formed that
board from? As an extension of that question, where do you think all of
the people who formed the government of Nauvoo came from? The highest
ranks of church officials. Out of all the government positions created
in this charter, only one person wasn’t a Mormon, Stephen A. Douglas,
who later converted and followed Brigham out to Utah. This isn’t
inherently a bad thing. The government is made by the people for the
people and elected officials should represent their constituents, and
with very VERY few exceptions, every person living in Commerce and the
areas around were all Mormons who’d fled Missouri the previous winter.
It becomes a problem when the government officials are enshrined as
untouchables of the community based on their standing within the church
and their refusal to run contrary to anything the prophet did. What
we’re reading right now is the quasi-legal foundation of an actual
theocracy within a democracy. Jo had finally done what he’d tried to do
for nearly a decade by this point. All of the rules and statutes set out
in this Nauvoo charter become much more insidious in nature when we read
the very next section, but I’m going to make you guys wait for just a
second so we can end reading this Charter on the most important and
amazing section.)

Sec. 26. The inhabitants of the city of Nauvoo are hereby exempted from
working on any road beyond the limits of the city, and for the purpose
of keeping the streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys in repair, to require
of the male inhabitants of said city, over the age of twenty-one, and
under fifty years, to labor on said streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys,
not exceeding three days in each year; any person failing to perform
such labor, when duly notified by the Supervisor, shall forfeit and pay
the sum of one dollar per day for each day so neglected or refused.

(Section 26 basically reserved the labors of the Nauvoo working men to
work only on Nauvoo infrastructure, saying they can’t be coopted by the
US or Illinois government to build infrastructure beyond the city limits
of Nauvoo.)

Sec. 27. The City Council shall have power to provide for the punishment
of offenders by imprisonment in the county or city jail, in all cases
when such offenders shall fail or refuse to pay the fines and
forfeitures, which may be recovered against them.

(Section 27 basically sets out the ability of the Nauvoo government to
enforce the laws and create a debtor’s prison if somebody refuses to pay
a debt for whatever reason. This is a powerful clause, but the means by
which they enforce it is where things become insidious in nature which
is section 25 that I said I was going to make you guys wait for.
Everything in the charter so far has been infrastructure and a lot of
bark, Section 25 adds the necessary bite to accompany said bark.)

Sec. 25. The City Council may organize the inhabitants of said city
subject to military duty, into a body of independent military men, to be
called the "Nauvoo Legion," the Court Martial of which shall be composed
of the commissioned officers of said Legion, and constitute the
law-making department, with full power and authority to make, ordain,
establish, and execute all such laws and ordinances as may be considered
necessary for the benefit, government, and regulation of said Legion;
provided said Court Martial shall pass no law or act, repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the Constitution of the United States, or of this
State; and provided also that the officers of the Legion shall be
commissioned by the Governor of the State. The said Legion shall perform
the same amount of military duty as is now or may be hereafter required
of the regular militia of the State, and shall be at the disposal of the
Mayor in executing the laws and ordinances of the city corporation, and
the laws of the State, and at the disposal of the Governor for the
public defense, and the execution of the laws of the State or of the
United States, and shall be entitled to their proportion of the public
arms; and provided also, that said Legion shall be exempt from all other
military duty.

Sec. 28. This Act is hereby declared to be a public Act, and shall take
effect on the first Monday of February next. WM. L. D. EWING, Speaker of
the House of Representatives. S. H. ANDERSON, Speaker of the Senate.

Approved Dec. 16, 1840. THOS. CARLIN. State of Illinois, Office of
Secretary of State.

I, Stephen A. Douglas, Secretary of State, do hereby certify that the
foregoing is a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law now on file in
my office. Witness my hand, and Seal of State, at Springfield, this 18th
day of December, 1840. \[L. S.\] S. A. DOUGLAS. Secretary of State.

If there had been any question of Jo’s military acumen and drive during
his time in Missouri, he just annihilated all doubts. Basically, the
only grounds Missouri was able to charge Jo with treason on was the fact
that he had his own quasi-militia who operated under his direction.
There was the Army of Israel which was the public arm of the militia,
then there were the Daughters of Zion, who would be known as the
Danites, the underground enforcement arm of the church. If you offended
Jo in Missouri, you could expect a late-night visit from the Danites. Jo
founded his own militia without state approval in Missouri and used them
in some military capacity multiple times throughout the months from July
to October 1838, this was an act of high treason, but the militia wasn’t
officially recognized by the state nor was Jo recognized as a military
leader so there was some ambiguity to his explicit involvement.

This section in the Nauvoo charter created the Nauvoo Legion and the
Illinois legislature approved the charter in December, meaning Jo now
had his own official government sanctioned militia. But the section was
sure to include some provisions which made this militia different in
regards to other state militias. Normally, militias were founded by
counties not specific cities. It was also sure to make the Legion the
law enforcement arm of the government, without a separate section
founding a police force. When a specific militia doubles as the police
force, that strikes some martial law tendencies. It put the militia in
complete control of the Mayor, who the Mormons would elect very soon, as
opposed to putting it in control of the Governor. And the last line in
the section is very important. ‘that said Legion shall be exempt from
all other military duty.’ This made it so the Nauvoo Legion was the
Nauvoo Legion and no other legion. The members of the Nauvoo Legion owed
fealty to only the mayor and were completely exempted from serving in
any other military capacity.

The usual purposes for a state, county, or in this case, a city, militia
were for fighting of any advances of Native Americans, and to be an
early forerunner to the national guard, slated to handle any situation
which may arise requiring armed militia to interfere. Scenarios
requiring a Nauvoo legion were significantly lacking, so it equated to a
men’s club of dressing up in military garb a few times a month and
running drills before all retiring to the Nauvoo hotel for a brew.
During these dress-up military drills, Jo would frequently don full
Leuitenant-General uniform with sword and musket riding around on his
white horse supervising the drills. Jo also used any excuse possible to
call out the Legion to woo visitors and show them just how awesome and
well put together Nauvoo was.

Jo couldn’t have been happier with the foundation of this Legion. He
sang its praises in his journal with passages like this, which I’m
reading from 111 of Nauvoo by Flanders:

“The appearance, order, and movements of the Legion were chaste, grand,
and imposing, and reflected great credit on the taste, skill, and tact
of the men comprising said Legion. We doubt whether the like can be
presented in any other city in the western country.”

And he was right. The Nauvoo Legion would prove to be a military force
superior to nearly any other militia in the western states by the time
of Jo’s death a mere 3.5 years after the passing of the Nauvoo Charter.
But Jo couldn’t help but overuse the Legion. The Warsaw Signal, a local
newspaper in Illinois, reported in 1842 this, and I’m reading it from
later on page 113 of Flander’s Nauvoo:

“Everything they say or do seems to breathe the spirit of military
tactics…. Truly fighting must be the creed of these saints.”

From another newspaper called the Sangamo Journal around the same time:

“What would be thought if the Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, or
Episcopalians of this state had military organizations…?”

Let’s sum up the amazing powers the Nauvoo Charter granted to Jo. We
won’t sum up the regular or mundane things, because there are just a
few subtle things in the charter that when combined together created a
veritable sanctuary city for Jo to do whatever he wanted.

The city of Nauvoo could now collect taxes on the citizens to be
dedicated to the overall city fund. They could issue writs of habeas
corpus on behalf of any prisoner in any jurisdiction to extradite them
to be tried in Nauvoo’s jurisdiction, or just to let them loose from the
grasp of the law in Jo’s case. And finally, the Nauvoo Legion was
created as a militia under the control of the Nauvoo city mayor,
commanded to do anything necessary to protect the people of Nauvoo, and,
more importantly, carry out the will of the church leadership.

Jo was untouchable to the law, had his own private military that the
state of Illinois couldn’t prosecute him for having, and had an endless
revenue stream in the form of taxation. After so many years of trials
and tribulations, fights with various governments, quarrels with
citizens of nearly every locality, and bickoring with the President of
the United States himself, Jo had finally, through legal means, unlocked
God mode. Unlike nearly every video game that loses all playability a
few hours after using the God mode cheat, the game of life presented and
endless well of opportunity for Jo to play and create whatever he wanted
to, and the Saints were subjected to any negative repercussions because
Jo had insulated himself with the city of Nauvoo as his legal shield.

Once Jo could enjoy the beauty of invincibility from all legal issues
and near invincibility from any rogue vigilantes who may decide the
Mormon problem was too scary and take out the head Mormon was the right
answer, he became a factory of ideas. The evolution of Mormon doctrine
and the incredible business ventures undertaken by Jo and the Saints
from this time forward will never cease to blow the mind. Jo had
fostered the perfect sandbox to manufacture any playground or
battlefield he saw as favorable to him or his endgame goals. Jo would do
nothing but unlock achievements from this time forward.

Whenever I’m playing video games with God mode active, the boredom
becomes crushing, and there’s only one way to restore the enjoyability
to the game, challenge has to be reinstated for the game to be playable
again. Eventually I have to turn off the God mode cheat code and make it
so I can die again to make things an actual challenge. Jo was no
stranger to finding a new challenge in the midst of boredom and
embarking upon it with utter reckless abandon. Eventually, to keep
things challenging and interesting, Jo ran for president of the United
States. Enough people were mad about this that Jo didn’t have the
protection of his Nauvoo Legion or his garments, and eventually was
assassinated by a faceless mob, being shot like a rat in a cage in
Carthage Jail, 3.5 years after this charter was passed. After that
happened, the state of Illinois realized the major issues the Nauvoo
Charter created and they dissolved Nauvoo as a state approved city and
forced the Mormons to flee to the new Zion and create Morridor.

Tanner Barker NaMoHE
