---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 62 - John Bennett then Brokeit
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-62-john-bennett-brokeit/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/episode-62-john-bennett-then-brokeit
category: History
date: 2017-08-10 15:48:39 PDT
---

Episode 62 – John Bennett then Brokeit

On this episode, we jump into early spring of 1840 with Elias Higbee in
Washington D.C. still advocating on behalf of the Mormons. Jo gets back
to Nauvoo after having abandoned the Mormons during a very harsh winter
to speak with the U.S. government to get some kind of recourse for the
Saints’ suffering in Missouri. Rigdon is laid up with sickness and won’t
respond to letters while in his fragile state. Jo holds a general
conference to handle the issues in Nauvoo which had cropped up in his
absence and we’re finally introduced to one of the most infamous
characters in all of Mormon history as he finally makes his way into our
historical timeline. After that, I’ll be speaking with Mark Naugle so he
can tell us a little of his story and the social impact of people
officially leaving the church in droves. Check out the Sunstone
presentation video\!

Links:

Smith-Entheogen Sunstone Presentation  
<https://youtu.be/t9OCSkqec5A>

BoM editions  
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Book_of_Mormon_Editions_(1830-1981)>

John Cook Bennett (Brokeit)  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/john-cook-bennett>  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/2>  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-15-august-1840/2>

Mark Naugle and QuitMormon  
<https://quitmormon.com/>  
<https://www.avvo.com/attorneys/84101-ut-mark-naugle-3415436.html>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Intro 8/10/17

Before we get into the episode, I just want to let everybody know that
the video of the Sunstone presentation Cody and I did on the
Smith-entheogen theory is officially up. We had some technical
difficulties so the video isn’t great, but the content is fully intact
and the response to the presentation has been overwhelmingly positive,
and I’d love to hear your thoughts on it, so be sure to chase the show
notes for a link, or just search “Did Joseph Smith drug the Mormons?” in
the youtube search bar and it should come up.

Last episode we discussed the meeting Jo had with a congressional
committee appointed to hear the plea of the Mormons. The Saints had
suffered so much of what they called persecution during their time in
Missouri and they felt deserving of some redress for their sufferings.
Jo and Elias Higbee were the Mormon leaders tasked with this meeting to
tell the Mormon’s side of the story and get Congress to empathize with
their plight. It wasn’t as successful as they hoped, and Jo left before
the hearings were even completed to handle business in Nauvoo he’d
abandoned to meet with the government in the first place.

Now it’s time to wipe off our milk moustaches as we get ready to munch
some meat for today.

While Jo had departed Washington D.C. and returned to Nauvoo after the
first few days of the congressional hearings, Judge Elias Higbee
remained in town to continue to advocate for the Mormons given what had
happened in Missouri.

We read last episode the resolution of the committee to relinquish any
presence in the conflict they held and left the problem to the state of
Missouri to deal with. Jo and the Mormons in Illinois and Iowa were
unaware of this resolution, and thus continued to gather testimonials
from the Mormons who’d suffered at the hands of the militia in Missouri
in bolstering the Mormon’s case in the application for redress. Judge
Elias Higbee stayed behind to continue the fight while Jo went back to
Nauvoo to continue handling church affairs.

During this whole time, Hingepin Sidney Rigdon stayed in Philadelphia,
remaining largely silent in reply to any letters which were sent to him.
At multiple times, Higbee wrote letters to Rigdon updating him on the
proceedings of the congressional committee, only to never hear back from
him in regards to his whereabouts. Finally, Rigdon took the time to pen
a letter to Jo in Nauvoo giving an update on his state of existence.
We’ll get to reading that letter in a bit, but before we do, let’s
briefly discuss the folder Jo and the Mormons were still putting
together for the congressional committee, unbeknownst to them, in
complete and utter futility.

As soon as Jo got back into town, he called a major conference to be
held to address whatever business he’d missed since his departure for
D.C. Needless to say, there had been some infighting going on in his
absence. We won’t get into the drama of it, but essentially Elder
Patten, Snow, and Fordham had done something that pissed off the other
brethren and they were stripped of their leadership ranking while Joseph
Noble, Simeon Porter, and Daniel Avery were appointed to fill the
vacancies.

After these petty disputes were sufficiently handled, Jo took control of
the meeting and preached something that surprised me to read when I came
across it in research for this episode.

From the Dan Vogel HoC vol 4 pg 76:

“President Joseph Smith, jr., addressed the Council on various subjects,
and in particular the consecration law; stating that the affair now
before Congress, was the only thing that ought to interest the Saints at
present; and till it was ascertained how it would terminate, no person
ought to be brought to account before the constituted authorities of the
Church for any offense whatever; and was determined that no man should
be brought before the Council in Nauvoo till that time, \&c.,\&c. That
the law of consecration coiuld not be kept here, and that it was the
will of the Lord that we should desist from trying to keep it; and if
persisted in, it would produce a perfect defeat of its object, and that
he assumed the whole responsibility of not keeping it until proposed by
himself.”

The law of consecration had been enshrined as a holy commandment in the
Doctrine and Covenants and the Mormons had attempted to practice it
while living in Missouri. The Law of Consecration sets out a system of
communalism by which the saints had to live, putting all their
possessions in the Bishop’s storehouse which would then be disseminated
to the saints as the leadership saw fit. Systems like this have
attempted to work in the past, but usually only enjoy success in very
small groups and only for very limited periods of time. The saints,
supposedly numbering almost 15,000 by this time, were far too large a
group to effectively practice it without corruption getting in the way.
The added problem when they were in Missouri was the fact that they were
stealing the property of the gentile non-Mormon Missourians in the land
roundabout, so if the government caught word that the Mormons were
practicing in Nauvoo the same system as served to be their downfall in
Missouri, it might look kinda bad.

Of course, if you’re a member of the brethren in this meeting asking
about the law of Consecration and Jo says we should focus on the
congressional hearings right now, a natural question arises, “But
brother Joseph, has not the lord commanded us to practice the law of
consecration?” to which Jo replied, “it is the will of the Lord that we
should desist from trying to keep it. Don’t worry guys, if God holds us
at fault for disobeying a direct commandment, I’m his prophet and I have
some pretty good pull with the big guy upstairs, I’ll take all the heat
for it.”

Regardless of God’s opinion on the subject, this was the most pragmatic
option to keep the Mormons from getting into deeper trouble. Not only
was the Missouri government in opposition to their cause, but now they
had the eye of the President and Congress so it was a good idea to keep
their noses clean for a little bit longer.

The next item of business in this conference is one line which sets the
tone for the next multiple entries, it simply says: “He requested every
exertion to be made to forward affidavits to Washington, and also
letters to Members of Congress.”

Then the HoC includes a ton of signed affidavits from Mormons who
suffered in Missouri, and I’ll just briefly read the summary paragraph
once all of these were compiled. Before reading this, remember that just
the affidavits from Jo and Hyrum alone totaled to $200k in claimed
damages, so once they have all the complaints cobbled together it should
fetch a healthy sum. From page 93 of volume 4 of the HoC:

“Thus I have given a few of the multitude of affidavits which might be
given to substantiate the facts of our persecution and death in
Missouri. When the brethren left Missouri, they were poor, having been
plundered of everything valued by mobs. Much of it was done under the
eye of the Government Officers, according to the foregoing
affidavits;--and all by the sanction of the State of Missouri, as the
acts of her Legislature testify; and being so numerous they were obliged
to scatter over the State of Illinois and different States to get bread
and clothing—so that but a few accounts against Missouri could be
collected without unreasonable exertions. About 491 individuals gave in
their claims against Missouri, which I presented to Congress—amounting
to about $1,381,044.51.5 Cents; leaving a multitude more of similar
bills hereafter to be presented—which if not settled immediately, will
ere long amount to a handsome sum—increasing by compound interest.”

That $1.381 mn in 1840 dollars amounts to, wait for it, $36,120,417. And
like I said last episode, most of the valuation they used to create that
number was highly suspect and couldn’t be verified by deed records. Many
of the Mormons were just glorified squatters and the government knew
that, so it’s understandable that they may have been a bit shocked by
the number Jo claimed in damages. It’s really no wonder they kicked it
back to Missouri to handle the issue internally, especially because the
federal government had much less power and influence back then as
opposed to now. Also worth noting, Jo had provided a revelation that was
agreed to by the brethren that he would be in control of the assets the
government paid out to the saints, so if the government did end up
paying out, Jo would have been one of the richest people in Illinois at
the time.

This council concluded with these calls to action to focus on the
congressional hearing, with nobody there knowing that it had been
rejected at the time. Finally, a letter came from Judge Elias Higbee,
who’d remained in Washington on behalf of the Mormons, addressed to Jo
and the brethren in Commerce.

“Dear Brother.—Our business is at last ended here. Yesterday a
resolution passed the Senate, that the committee should be discharged;
and that we might withdraw the accompanying papers, which I have done. I
have also taken a copy of the Memorial, and want to be off for the West
immediately. I have not gotten a letter from President Rigdon, although
I have frequently written to him. I have received a letter from brother
Bennett, stating that he was in the Jerseys, and that he was calculating
to have me come that way and go home with him; and also that he had
business which he wanted me to attend to at the office here…

There is one honest Quaker-looking sort of man here, by the name of
William Green,… who has two iron printing presses, with other things
necessary, that would come to Commerce, provided you could find work for
him, and inform him of the same. How much work there is to do I know
not; therefore merely write that if such a man and establishment are
wanted, you could easily obtain them, or would know where they could be
obtained…”

And that was it, the saints were supremely screwed over for so many
reasons and the whole case was dismissed. They couldn’t go back to
Missouri as the extermination order was still in place and Jo would
certainly be arrested as soon as he set foot across the state line.
Higbee got to another important point which seems to underlie so many of
the letters being sent to the presidency from every group of
missionaries, Higbee told Jo of a printer looking for some work to
hopefully fill the vacuum of church-printed materials everybody was
requesting to be filled.

The quorum on their mission across the states, soon to be in England,
were sending similar letters to Jo in hopes they could print some Books
of Mormon, hymn books, and church periodicals, but Jo didn’t want to
cede control of that power and doesn’t seemed to have replied in the
affirmative to any of these requests. He would eventually give up
control and allow the quorum to print just over 4,000 Books of Mormon
out of Liverpool in 1841, but that was a year and a half after multiple
people had been asking for copies or asking Jo to release the copyright
so they could print copies and forward him the proceeds. It was a huge
project that Jo would need to oversee since the 2,000 copies published
out of Nauvoo near the end of 1840 would undergo heavy editing under the
careful hand of Jo, Ebenezer Robinson, and Don Carlos Smith. If you want
a breakdown of all the editions of the BoM, you’ll find a link to the
encyclopedia of Mormonism on the byu website in the show notes.

But let’s go on the other point Higbee mentioned in that letter about
writing to Rigdon and not getting anything in return. I mentioned it
earlier, but let’s finally read some of that letter Hingepin Rigdon
finally sent to Jo after his seeming hiatus from any contact.

“Dear Sir:--I thought I would occupy a portion of this morning in
writing to you. By a letter received from brother Higbee yesterday, I
have learned that the Senate has decided that they have no
constitutional right to interfere in the case between us, and the people
of Missouri; and refer us to the courts for redress; either those of
Missouri or the United States. (this is where Rigdon hatches a plan and
possibly unites perceptions against a common enemy who the Mormons
painted as responsible for all their troubles in Missouri) Now I am
confident, that there is but one person in Missouri, that we can sue
with safety, and that is Boggs, and he is known to be a bankrupt, and
unable to pay his debts; that if we should sue him, we will have the
cost to pay, as he has nothing to pay it with. We are therefore left to
bear the loss without redress, at present.

(This next portion really describes Rigdon’s situation, which may have
contributed to his overall pessimistic outlook on the situation, both
his own and of the Mormons.)

I am up to this time without means to get home, but I have no uneasiness
about it. I shall doubtless get means as soon as my health will admit of
my going. My health is slowly improving, and I think if I have no
relapse, I will be able to leave for home, some time in the month of
May; \&c.

I have not had a chill for about four weeks, my appetite is quite good,
and my food sets well on my stomach, and digests well, but there are the
remains by spells, of that foulness of stomach, which has troubled me so
much; and those morbid sensations, which were the cause of it, my feet
and legs swell every afternoon, considerably. There is a great
excitement got up here by A\[lmon\]. Babbit about going to Kirtland; a
number from Philadelphia are going immediately. Now it is my opinion
that this is an unwise movement: large purchases have been made there
for the saints, and if they should fail to purchase, it will leave us in
difficulty…

I wish you would say to my family, that on yesterday I had a letter from
George Robinson, dated at Vermont; he is well. You may also say to them
that the prospect of my speedy restoration to health is flattering at
present; and that I will be there as soon as I think my health
sufficient for the journey. I expect to return to Philadelphia week
after next, and will not tarry one day longer that I think my health
requires.

My company is all gone, and \[I\] am entirely alone; but it is all
right, there is no blame. I should have been very glad to have been at
the conference; but as I cannot, I repine not.

Believe me your br. In the hope of eternal life as ever,

Sidney Rigdon”

Rigdon was in a bad place. I’ve discussed him at length, occasionally
making reference to his mental state of wellbeing, or lack thereof, and
how it may have played a role in his punctuated involvement with Jo and
the Mormons. As we get further into the Nauvoo years, Rigdon continually
disconnects himself from the affairs of the Mormons. He gives occasional
sermons and attends various meetings, but his place as second in command
of the church was being steadily threatened more with each passing day.
The vacancy his absence left was quickly filled by a few select brethren
who became Jo’s best friends and closest advisors periodically
throughout the Nauvoo years.

I’m going to read 2 more letters that were sent to Jo as Rigdon was
making his way back to Nauvoo, and the implications are incredibly
crucial to the upcoming scenes in Nauvoo, as the person who penned the
letter would become one of the most critical influencer to Nauvoo city
policies during his brief time with the Mormons.

These are taken from the Joseph Smith papers, check the show notes for
links:

“[Fairfield](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#5029012210424413938)

 Ill.— July 25th. 1840

Rev & Dear Friends:—

The last time I wrote you was during the pendency of your difficulties
with the Missourians. you are aware that at that time I held the office
of “Brigadier General of the Invincible Dragoons” of
this [state](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#11985557753160196763)
and proffered you my entire energies for your deliverance from a
ruthless andsavage, tho. cowardly foe; but the Lord came to your
rescue and saved you with a powerful arm. I am happy to find that you
are now in a civilized land, and in the enjoyment of peace, and
happiness. Some months ago I resigned my office with an intention of
removing to your town, & joining your people; but hitherto I have
been prevented: I hope however to remove
to [Commerce](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#9614434605419289743) and
unite with
your [church](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#9687904480270979863)
next spring. I believe I should be much happier with you. I have many
things to communicate which I would prefer doing orally, and I propose
to meet you
in [Springfield](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#10271465580243380577) on
the first monday in Dec. next as I shall be there at that time on state
and [United
states](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#9012544167189689811)’
business.

If I remove
to [Commerce](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/1#18410623781453164090) I
expect to follow my profession, and to that end I enclose you a slip
from the “Louisville Journal” to give you an idea of my professional
standing.

On the first of this month I was appointed to the office
of “Quarter-Master General of the State
of [Illinois](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-25-july-1840/2#13279292624612777119),”
which office I expect to hold for some years, I hope you have been well,

In haste. Write me immediately.

Yours Respectfully

XXXX”

The second letter is much more important for the fate of the saints in
Nauvoo. It was sent less than a month later.

“Rev Joseph Smith Jr & [Sidney
Rigdon](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-15-august-1840/1#10878452921570743269)

Respected Friends

I have written you several timescommunications
to [Commerce](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-15-august-1840/1#8242006077517261700) & [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-15-august-1840/1#2817408725603060444)
supposing they were different places but a brother to a Lady in your
community now in this place informs me that they are one and the same. I
have received no reply to my letters and attribute the delay to a press
of business or professional absence. I have come to the conclusion to
join your people immediately and take up my abode with you.

Let us adopt as our motto— Sicut patribus sit Deus nobis—(As God was
with our fathers, so may he be with us)—and adopt the means to the end
and the victory is ours— The winged warrior of the air will not cease to
be our proud emblem of liberty, and the dogs of war will be forever
chained. I shall be with you in about two weeks and shall devote my time
and energies to the advancement of the cause of truth and virtue and the
advocacy of the Holy religion which you have so nobly defended, & so
honorably sustained. My love to all the bretheren. With sentiments of
paternal regard

Yours, Respectfully

[J\[ohn\] C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-john-c-bennett-15-august-1840/2#12803029674277416599)”

John Cook Bennett made for a powerful ally to Jo and the saints, but
also made himself to be one of the church’s greatest adversaries. This
is from his biography on the JSP.

“3 Aug. 1804–5 Aug. 1867. Physician, minister, poultry breeder. Born at
Fairhaven, Bristol Co., Massachusetts. Son of John Bennett and Abigail
Cook. Moved to Marietta, Washington Co., Ohio, 1808; to Massachusetts,
1812; and back to Marietta, 1822. Married first Mary A. Barker, 9 Jan.
1826, at Marietta. Joined Pickaway Masonic Lodge, ca. 1827, in
Circleville, Pickaway Co., Ohio. Methodist; later affiliated with
Christian Disciple (Campbellite) faith. Moved to Wheeling, Ohio Co.,
Virginia (later in West Virginia), 1831. Charged with lying and other
misconduct by Pickaway Masonic Lodge, 1834. Moved to Fairfield, Wayne
Co., Illinois, 1838. Commissioned brigadier general in Second Division
in Illinois militia, 1839. Moved to Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Illinois, 1840.
Baptized into LDS church, Sept. 1840, at Nauvoo. Helped draft and secure
Nauvoo charter, 1840.”

There’s a lot more after that, but we can’t get ahead of ourselves.
Bennet had exchanged letters with Jo a few times prior to this, having
learned Mormon doctrine sometime in the mid-1830s, but he apparently
hadn’t given it proper consideration up to that point or something, so
here we are, August of 1840, and he sent the letter to Jo and Rigdon
telling them that he intends on joining the Mormon religion in Nauvoo.

Let me read from Robert Flander’s book, Nauvoo, chapter 4, to give us
some context on John Bennett.

“It seemed not to occur to Smith that some men might wish to cultivate
him for their own purposes. Mormonism, like any growing enterprise,
attracted the ambitious and the clever. Some were men of integrity and
some were not; Dr. John C. Bennet, M.E., Quarter-master General of
Illinois, was apparently one of the latter, but Smith was at the outset
of their relationship a less able judge of character than of talent and
charm. Little is known of Bennett either before or after his affair with
the Mormons. He was an officer of the “Invincible Dragoons,” a militia
company of Edwards, White, and Wabash Counties in southeastern Illinois,
and was living at Fairfield in neighboring Wayne County in 1840. Despite
the medical title, Bennett presented the image of a military man.
Politics and the pursuit of influence were the professions he sought
when he approached the Mormons and offered his services…

Bennett in his letter conveyed the air of a busy man of affairs with
obligations and responsibilities of moment. Yet he seemed to be one of
those noblemen of the earth who had condescended to believe God’s truth
with humility, and meekness to obey the command of His Prophet:…

Bennett was serious about moving to Navuoo and joining the Church, and
he arrived in August or September of 1840. He was there, however, not as
an ordinary convert, but in the seat of power at the Prophet’s right
hand. The Mormon leader felt himself in need of a man such as Bennett
seemed to be as an adviser, confidant, and executive lieutenant. Sidney
Rigdon was proving a slender reed in the demanding business of kingdom
building. Brigham Young and Heber Kimball were in England. Smith was
young, without knowledge of the ways of the world in which he was now
committed to promote the Kingdom, and he was standing virtually alone at
the head of his people. Bennett seemed to be a man of ambition, force,
energy and intelligence—qualities that had already won him the
preferment in the world. They were attributes which Smith possessed
himself and admired in others, and he expected this prestigious new
aid-de-camp to “open doors” for the advancement of Nauvoo. Bennett
played a conspicuous role in developing two of the most characteristic
and important Nauvoo institutions: the city government and the
\[Nauvoo\] Legion. He took up residence in Nauvoo in time to avail the
benefits of his “speaking powers” to the semiannual conference in
October, 1840, which took official action concerning these institutions…
On October 5 the agenda of business included a motion to appoint a
committee responsible for drafting “a bill for the incorporation of the
town of Nauvoo, and for other purposes.” Smith, Bennett, and Robert B.
Thompson were designated as the committee, presumably by Smith as
presiding officer. Smith and Bennett had already been at work on the
charter and probably had it completed before the conference met. On the
same afternoon that committee was authorized\[,\] Bennett reported to
the assembly “the outlines” of the city charter. The conference endorsed
the committee’s work, apparently with little or no debate. Bennet was
now an officially recognized and endorsed architect of the city’s
future.”

I might make some enemies with this, but I love John Bennett. I don’t
love what he did, because, let’s face it, he was a grade A premium all
American bastard, but what he symbolizes is so powerful and exciting as
Nauvoo was beginning to become a sprawling metropolis in the early
1840s. Bennett was just a more brazen full-tilt version of Joseph Smith.
Everything Bennett did to be maligned in church history, Joseph was
doing under the surface, Jo was just a bit more discreet about his
actions. While Jo practiced the God-approved polygamy with some women in
Nauvoo, Bennett was openly propositioning women to become his spiritual
wives on a much wider scale and likely providing abortions when
pregnancy inevitably happened. While Jo tried to lobby congress, and rub
elbows with influential people in government, Bennett had years of
practice in government and leadership roles and used that experience to
bend people to his will. What Jo delivered by divine revelation as
guidance for the saints, Bennett enshrined the will of God into law.
When Jo thought it might be a good idea to curb the public drunkenness
plaguing Nauvoo, Bennett passed city ordinances to outlaw the sale of
all alcohol in small quantities. Jo likely did a number of things out of
nothing more than self-interest, whereas self-interest was John
Bennett’s sole guiding principle. That was Bennett’s thing, he
personified all of Jo’s most and least likable traits and turned them up
a couple levels until the people couldn’t take him anymore. He was an
eccentric human version of every polarizing trait the prophet held. If
Jo was a real protagonist to a “based on a true story” type of
fictionalized Mormon history, Bennett would be his evil twin, the
anti-Jo, if you will. His style was brashness, his forte, intensity. He
did everything Jo did, but to such extremes that he broke everything.
When John Bennett got ahold of something, he didn’t bennett, he brokeit,
inducting John Bennett into the echelons of influential Mormon
historical figures deserving of his own NaMo nickname. John Bennett will
be known to us as John Brokeit for the purposes of our historical
timeline. Keep your eye on this one, he may not be with us long, but his
power and presence influenced Mormon history and his defection from the
church nearly brokeit in half, leaving Nauvoo in social ruins amidst
rumors of underground sex and abortion rings and using undue political
influence leading up to Jo’s run for President of the United States. I
look forward to learning all about John Brokeit as we move further into
the Nauvoo years of Jo’s Mormonism. Let’s see just how far John Brokeit
can bend Jo and the Mormons before he breaks everything and begins his
crusade against the people he once called his acolytes.

Speaking of people trying to break a system, the next segment you’re
going to hear is an interview I had with Mark Naugle of quitmormon.org.
The audio isn’t great because it was conducted in my car right by the
airport, by the conversation is really great and I have a feeling like
Naugle’s work is only the harbinger of a broader trend of people,
especially millennials, who are giving the church the middle-finger by
sending in their resignation letters.

Just a parting thought on that, I think quitmormon.org and Mark Naugle
fill an incredibly necessary and altruistic niche. This is something the
Mormon community needs as so many people are relieved when they finally
get that confirmation letter back telling them their names are off the
church’s official records. Occasionally pop over to the ex-mormon
subreddit to see posts we talked about where people are ecstatic to get
the letters as it’s the official letter saying the monkey is off their
back. I’m glad Naugle does what he does and that the service exists, and
I think the way he approaches the subject is perfect, the service is
there to help you if you decide you want to have your name removed, but
he doesn’t advertise or evangelize the service saying that people should
leave. It’s a decision for you to make personally. I’ve made my case in
the past for why I won’t have my name removed, but that’s my decision,
and if I ever change my mind, Mark will be my emissary to the church in
having my name removed. It’s great to have the freedom of choice in the
face of the church when claims to have all the power to define who is
and is not Mormon. You’ll find a link in the show notes for quitmormon
as well as some contact information for Mark should you have any
questions, and once again, I want to thank Mark for taking some time out
of his vacation to meet with me and have the interview.

Riss NaMo HE

Sunstone presentation
