---
layout: post
title: Ep 81 - CC Polygamy Pt4 FLDS Warren Jeffs
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-81-cc-polygamy-pt4-flds-warren-jeff/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-81-cc-polygamy-pt4-flds-warren-jeffs
category: History
date: 2017-12-15 04:22:18 +0000
---

Ep 81 -- CC Polygamy Pt4 FLDS Warren Jeffs

On this episode, we continue our examination of Mormon polygamy by
walking through more than a century of plural marriage history
affiliated with Mormonism. We begin with the Second Manifesto of 1904
and discuss the rise of the Council of Friends and the resulting
Fundamentalist Mormon sects which arose from the Council's leadership.
We finish the last half hour with a quick deconstruction of the modern
FLDS and Warren Jeffs.

Links:

Utah Becomes a State\
<http://www.ilovehistory.utah.gov/topics/statehood/index.html>

Constitution of Utah\
<https://archives.utah.gov/community/exhibits/Statehood/1896text.htm>

Manifesto and the End of Plural Marriage\
<https://www.lds.org/topics/the-manifesto-and-the-end-of-plural-marriage?lang=eng>

Second Manifesto 11904\
<http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Second_Manifesto>

Reed Smoot Hearings\
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Smoot_Hearings>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reed_Smoot>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reed_Smoot_hearings>

Kidnapped from That Land: The Government Raids on the Short Creek
Polygamists\
<https://books.google.com/books?id=0N6C_HZp3wUC&pg=PA57&lpg=PA57&dq=1935+short+creek+oath+to+renounce+polygamy&source=bl&ots=AM3I4yUVIa&sig=7HbVtnr1_seOwJ7b5onaadmz2Xc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwib45-Ut4XYAhUR1mMKHdEjBVUQ6AEIKTAA#v=onepage&q&f=false>

John Taylor 1886 Polygamy Revelation\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1886_Revelation>

Council of Friends\
[http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm\#\_edn2\#\_edn2\#\_edn2\#\_edn2](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn2#_edn2#_edn2#_edn2)

Lorin C. Woolley\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorin_C._Woolley#Plural_marriage>\
<https://web.archive.org/web/20080922184416/http://www.fldstruth.org:80/administration.php?index=5>

1933 Final Manifesto\
<https://books.google.com/books?id=TgQxDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA382&lpg=PA382&dq=1933+final+manifesto+mormon&source=bl&ots=P1wFZj29bq&sig=BcHeJ8TXUO0Z7p4K4cm9Jjwwowg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjnh8HLwoXYAhVLw2MKHbLbBJ0Q6AEIODAC#v=onepage&q=1933%20final%20manifesto%20mormon&f=false>

J. Leslie Broadbent\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/JLeslieBroadbent.htm>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._Leslie_Broadbent>

John Yates Barlow\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/JOHNYATESBARLOW.htm>

Bradley's Kidnapped from that Land\
<https://books.google.com/books?id=0N6C_HZp3wUC&pg=PA57&lpg=PA57&dq=1935+short+creek+oath+to+renounce+polygamy&source=bl&ots=AM3I4yUVIa&sig=7HbVtnr1_seOwJ7b5onaadmz2Xc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwib45-Ut4XYAhUR1mMKHdEjBVUQ6AEIKTAA#v=onepage&q&f=false>

26 Jul 1953 Short Creek Raid\
<https://www.newspapers.com/image/116729813/?terms=short+creek>\
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC&dat=19530727&printsec=frontpage&hl=en>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_Creek_raid#cite_note-13>

Rulon Allred\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/RulonCAllred.htm>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rulon_C._Allred>

Timeline of Polygamist Mormon Sects\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Mormon_fundamentalist_leaders>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Mormon_fundamentalist_leaders>

Kingston Group\
<http://kingstonclan.com/>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latter_Day_Church_of_Christ>

Apostolic United Brethren\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/AUB.htm>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apostolic_United_Brethren>

United Effort Plan\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamentalist_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-Day_Saints>\
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/year-of-polygamy/episode-111-the-united-effort-plan/>\
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/10/31/us/fundamentalist-church-of-jesus-christ-of-latter-day-saints-fast-facts/index.html>

Utah and Arizona withdraw from UEP\
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/865690488/Utah-quietly-withdraws-from-FLDS-UEP-Trust-fund.html>

Most Fundamentalist Groups\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Mormon_fundamentalist_leaders>

Rulon Jeffs\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/RulonJeffs.htm>\
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/936024/FLDS-leader-Rulon-Jeffs-dies.html>

Warren Jeffs\
<http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/WarrenJeffs.htm>\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warren_Jeffs#cite_ref-64>\
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/645197034/Warren-Jeffs-timeline.html>\
<http://www.hcn.org/articles/mormon-fundamentalists-control-short-creek-polygamy-utah-warren-jeffs>\
<https://web.archive.org/web/20130615042231/http://www.cbc.ca/fifth/bustupinbountiful/timeline.html>\
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/645197034/Warren-Jeffs-timeline.html>

Warren Jeffs Apprehended\
<https://www.stgeorgeutah.com/news/archive/2015/08/28/ccj-anniversary-flds-warren-jeffs-arrest/#.WjMh-0qnE2w>

SPLC Classifies FLDS as Hate Group\
<https://web.archive.org/web/20100203152005/http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?sid=342>

Warren Jeffs child-sex tapes\
<http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/video/warren-jeffs-trial-audio-tape-underage-wife-sexual-assault-14229374>\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrnWSHF4Ikw>

Warren Jeffs renounces prophetic claims\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eh9wnCcR0LE>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Before we get started today, I just wanted to talk to those of you who
support the show through patreon.com/nakedmormonism. Recently Patreon
announced they would be changing how they charge fees, shouldering cost
onto those who pledge and skimming the increased profit off the top for
themselves. This planned change was met with wide public outcry and
Patreon published a retraction a few days ago stating they will not be
putting the change into place. In the apology announcement they said
they'll be looking at how to address the issues this change would have
fixed in the future, so I'm keeping my eye on their blog posts to make
sure something like this doesn't happen again. If they threaten to do
something like this, it may be time to find a different intermediary
between myself and those who wish to support and fund the research. If
the announcement of these changes caused you to change or cancel your
patronage, I hope you'll consider jumping back on and continuing to
support the show. I apologize on behalf of patreon to all of you who may
have been inconvenienced by this mess, and I hope it hasn't scared you
away if you've been considering supporting the research which goes into
the show. We'll thank new patrons or pledge edits once the dust settles
from this small kerfuffle. With that out of the way, let's get into
today's 20-page essay.

Today begins part 4 of our walk through the history of Polygamy. I'll
preface this conversation by saying that I had planned to bring a guest
on this week to discuss the history of the FLDS, which will be the focus
of today's episode, however, after conducting the interview I feel like
it will be better as a standalone episode. So next week we're going to
have Lindsay Park from Sunstone and Year of Polygamy to discuss some of
the nuances of Mormon polygamy particularly in modern-day practices. As
a preface to that interview, today's episode will walk us through 100
years of Polygamy history focusing on primarily the FLDS, the largest
and most well-known polygamist faction of Mormonism. It is paramount to
understand the content of this episode in order to properly understand
the context of what Lindsay and I discuss for next week's episode.

With that out of the way, let's talk 20^th^ and 21^st^-century polygamy
in Mormonism. We'll spend most of our time discussing the FLDS, but it's
important to understand they are by far not the only polygamist Mormon
sect out there. We'll be making slight reference to other groups as they
crop up, but our focus is on the largest population of fundamentalist
Mormons, which is the FLDS.

To approach this subject, let's pick up where last episode left off with
the 1890 manifesto. Once the first manifesto was published, the practice
of polygamy was merely driven further underground. Utah had been
declared a United States territory when the Mormons began flooding in.
It was granted territory status in 1848 once the United States won the
Mexican War and annexed thousands of square miles. From that point
forward the territory was in relentless pursuit of gaining statehood,
but the public practice of polygamy was the primary holdup. Once the
1890 manifesto was publicly declared, the United States government
essentially put the territory on a probationary period of 6 years for
Utah to get all its ducks in a row and establish the status quo
political parties. Prior to this, most Mormons were members of the Utah
People's party, which the government only marginally recognized as a
legitimate political party. In 1894 the government passed the Utah
Enabling Act, which gave Utah the ability to compose a state
constitution and be admitted into the Union as a state equal with all
other states.

In 1895 the Utah government officials met in a constitutional convention
of sorts and ratified their constitution and finally on 6 Jan 1896 Utah
was granted full statehood as the 45^th^ state to gain such status.

If we focus on just the text of the 1890 manifesto though, it said
nothing about outlawing polygamy or claiming it wasn't a tenet of the
religion, Wilford Woodruff merely advised against anybody taking or
solemnizing plural marriage. This was a wink-nod situation for most
people practicing and plural marriages were still actively formed. One
thing worth pointing out, just like with the abolition of slavery, many
families had built their entire structure and livelihood on polygamist
practices. Just because something was outlawed didn't mean it instantly
went away. The constitution explicitly prohibited polygamy with Article
III stating specifically:

"First:\--Perfect toleration of religious sentiment is guaranteed. No
inhabitant of this State shall ever be molested in person or property on
account of his or her mode of religious worship; but polygamous or
plural marriages are forever prohibited."

Utah had been built upon polygamy, and it was a struggle to get people
to stop practicing as such, especially those who were already involved
in polygamous relationships. A second manifesto was necessary to
solidify the LDS religion's stance on new plural marriages being
solemnized.

From the LDS.org essay titled "The manifesto and the end of plural
marriage"

"For much of the 19th century, a significant number of members of The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints practiced plural
marriage---the marriage of one man to more than one woman. The beginning
and end of the practice were directed by revelation through God's
prophets. The initial command to practice plural marriage came through
Joseph Smith, the founding prophet and President of the Church. In 1890,
President Wilford Woodruff issued the Manifesto, which led to the end of
plural marriage in the Church.

The end of plural marriage required great faith and sometimes
complicated, painful---and intensely personal---decisions on the part of
individual members and Church leaders. Like the beginning of plural
marriage in the Church, the end of the practice was a process rather
than a single event. Revelation came "line upon line, precept upon
precept."...

"Church members living in 1890 generally believed that the Manifesto was
the "work of the Lord," in Franklin D. Richards's words. But the full
implications of the Manifesto were not apparent at first; its scope had
to be worked out, and authorities differed on how best to proceed. "We
have been led to our present position by degrees," Apostle Heber J.
Grant explained. Over time and through effort to receive continuing
revelation, Church members saw "by degrees" how to interpret the
Manifesto going forward.

At first, many Church leaders believed the Manifesto merely "suspended"
plural marriage for an indefinite time. Having lived, taught, and
suffered for plural marriage for so long, it was difficult to imagine a
world without it. George Q. Cannon, a counselor in the First Presidency,
likened the Manifesto to the Lord's reprieve from the command to build
temples in Missouri in the 1830s after the Saints were expelled from the
state. In a sermon given immediately after the Manifesto was sustained
at general conference, Cannon quoted a passage of scripture in which the
Lord excuses those who diligently seek to carry out a commandment from
Him, only to be prevented by their enemies: "Behold, it behooveth me to
require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to
accept of their offerings."

Nevertheless, many practical matters had to be settled. The Manifesto
was silent on what existing plural families should do. On their own
initiative, some couples separated or divorced as a result of the
Manifesto; other husbands stopped cohabiting with all but one of their
wives but continued to provide financial and emotional support to all
dependents. In closed-door meetings with local leaders, the First
Presidency condemned men who left their wives by using the Manifesto as
an excuse. "I did not, could not and would not promise that you would
desert your wives and children," President Woodruff told the men. "This
you cannot do in honor."

In 1898 Wilford Woodruff passed away and Lorenzo Snow took the mantle
for a brief period before his death in 1901. With these old holdovers
from Nauvoo polygamy gone from Mormon leadership, Joseph F. Smith,
nephew to the original prophet and son of Hyrum Smith, took the prophet
mantle and made some powerful reforms to streamline Mormonism and make
it more acceptable by the standards of broader Christianity.

In 1902, a man named Reed Smoot, an apostle to Joseph F. Smith, ran for
Utah State Senate. Smoot was a highly contested public figure as a
polygamist running for public office. Smoot won his Senatorial seat in
1903 and the federal government proceeded to hold a series of hearings
from 1904 to 1907, known as the Reed Smoot hearings, bickering about
whether or not a polygamist should be allowed to hold a government
office. They failed to reach a 2/3rds majority vote to unseat Smoot and
he retained his office as Utah Senator. Political action was necessary
to show Utah's good faith at the beginning of these hearings so the
prophet Joseph F. Smith issued the 1904 second manifesto on polygamy in
the April general conference, which reads as follows:

"Inasmuch as there are numerous reports in circulation that plural
marriages have been entered into, contrary to the official declaration
of President Woodruff of September 24, 1890, commonly called the
manifesto, which was issued by President Woodruff, and adopted by the
Church at its general conference, October 6, 1890, which forbade any
marriages violative of the law of the land, I, Joseph F. Smith,
President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, hereby
affirm and declare that no such marriages have been solemnized with the
sanction, consent, or knowledge of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.

And I hereby announce that all such marriages are prohibited, and if any
officer or member of the Church shall assume to solemnize or enter into
any such marriage, he will be deemed in transgression against the
Church, and will be liable to be dealt with according to the rules and
regulations thereof and excommunicated therefrom.\
\
Joseph F. Smith,\
President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

From 1890 to 1904, the church leadership had been tacitly approving of
or merely turning a blind eye to new plural marriages. With this second
manifesto, plural marriages were officially prohibited and the polygamy
witch hunt from within the church was officially kicked off.

As stated in that LDS.org article, ending plural marriage was a process,
not an on/off binary commandment. Many of those in plural relationships
saw the 1890 and 1904 manifestos as merely a suspension of plural
marriage in Utah. On the public face of the LDS church, polygamy was
officially unacceptable, but behind the closed doors of the temples,
some of the leadership saw it as necessary to continue practicing to
fulfill the new and everlasting covenant as commanded by previous
prophets.

Now our focus shifts towards Short Creek. Short Creek is home to the
twin cities of polygamy, namely Hilldale, Utah and Colorado City,
Arizona. These were originally settled by Mormon polygamists back in
1860s and Brigham Young had said during a visit that one day Short Creek
"would be the head and not the tail of the Church."

Finally in 1913, the area was founded as a ranching community, home to
dozens of polygamist families. Now we introduce somebody into the fold
who will become an early leader of the FLDS, Lorin C. Woolley. Woolley
had served as a mail carrier among the Mormon leadership right before
the 1890 manifesto was released. Woolley had been interacting with John
Taylor and Wilford Woodruff in their hideouts while they were hiding
from the government. Lorin Woolley claimed to have an 1886 revelation
from John Taylor which assumed the first-person God narrative when John
Taylor supposedly asked God about polygamy:

"My son John, you have asked me concerning the New and Everlasting
Covenant how far it is binding upon my people.

Thus saith the Lord: All commandments that I give must be obeyed by
those calling themselves by my name unless they are revoked by me or by
my authority, and how can I revoke an everlasting covenant, for I the
Lord am everlasting and my everlasting covenants cannot be abrogated nor
done away with, but they stand forever.

Have I not given my word in great plainness on this subject? Yet have
not great numbers of my people been negligent in the observance of my
law and the keeping of my commandments, and yet have I borne with them
these many years; and this because of their weakness---because of the
perilous times, and furthermore, it is more pleasing to me that men
should use their free agency in regard to these matters. Nevertheless, I
the Lord do not change and my word and my covenants and my law do not,
and as I have heretofore said by my servant Joseph: All those who would
enter into my glory must and shall obey my law. And have I not commanded
men that if they were Abraham's seed and would enter into my glory, they
must do the works of Abraham? I have not revoked this law, nor will I,
for it is everlasting, and those who will enter into my glory must obey
the conditions thereof; even so, Amen"

The details surrounding how this revelation came to be have evolved
since Woolley claimed to have the text of the revelation in 1912, giving
the story a legendary status of being an 8-hour meeting during which the
resurrected Joseph Smith appeared to John Taylor to deliver the
revelation. Whether or not John Taylor actually gave this revelation has
been called into question as the document only surfaced more than 25
years after his death. Nobody could call it into question as it was
reportedly given in a closed-door meeting while Taylor was in hiding
from the government. Nothing corroborates this document. Woolley just
cropped up in 1912 with a piece of paper sporting John Taylor's
signature and the cornerstone for a new prophetic foundation for a
break-off sect was officially laid.

Short Creek soon became a refugee camp for those who were excommunicated
from the mainstream LDS church for practicing polygamy.

Over the next 2 decades the area would amass a significant population of
polygamists, and the LDS church seemed to try their best to ignore their
existence. The geographical location of Short Creek offered some
insulation from raids by state officials. It's right on the border of
Utah and Arizona, so when state officials would raid the area, the
inhabitants would merely move across the state line out of their
jurisdiction.

During this 2-decade period from the early 1910s to the 1930s, a number
of significant events occurred for polygamist Mormons. In 1918,
President Joseph F. Smith passed away and handed his prophetic mantle
down to Heber J. Grant, who went on a public crusade to end polygamy or
disconnect fundamentalist sects from the mainstream LDS church.
Eventually these disparaged practitioners who were slowly divorcing
themselves from the mainstream LDS church formed what was known as the
Council of Friends in an effort to consolidate power and leadership over
the numerous polygamist sects. Lorin Woolley claimed that John Taylor
had originally formed the Council of Friends in 1886 at the same time he
delivered the revelation we previously read. The Council of Friends was
comprised of George Q. Cannon, Samuel Bateman, Charles Wilcken, John
Wooley, and Lorin Woolley. Lorin later claimed in 1932 that the Council
of Friends dated back to Joseph Smith who initially founded the Council
in 1832. These were all spurious claims. We can't minimize Woolley's
self-interest in having divine sanction for his actions to continue
practicing polygamy.

From Mormonfundamentalism.com about the Council of Friends:\
"Throughout the 1920s, Church leaders worked diligently to neutralize
the efforts of the budding fundamentalists.  President Heber J. Grant
issued stern warnings denouncing their teachings and practices in 1925,
1926, and
1931.[\[1\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn1#_edn1#_edn1#_edn1) 
Finally in June 1933, the First Presidency comprised of Heber J. Grant,
Anthony W. Ivins and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., issued an "Official
Statement," which was published in The Deseret News, Church
Section.[\[2\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn2#_edn2#_edn2#_edn2) 
Called by many the "Final Manifesto," it was penned by Second Counselor
Clark[\[3\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn3#_edn3#_edn3#_edn3) and
warned "that polygamous or plural marriages are not and cannot now be
performed" and was written "in order that there may be no excuse for any
Church member to be misled by the false representations or the corrupt,
adulterous practices of the members of this secret, and (by reputation)
oath-bound
organization."[\[4\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn4#_edn4#_edn4#_edn4)\
The declaration did more than simply clarify Church doctrine and advise
Church members, it also assisted in transforming "a rag-tag collection
of polygamist sympathizers\... into a cohesive
movement."[\[5\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn5#_edn5#_edn5#_edn5) 
With Joseph Musser at the typewriter,
Woolley,[\[6\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn6#_edn6#_edn6#_edn6)Broadbent,
and Barlow fired back by publishing one of the most revolutionary
teachings to ever emerge from Mormon fundamentalism."

We won't read it here, but you can find a link in the show notes for the
1933 final manifesto, and it is SCATHING. The final manifesto was the
final straw for the Council of Friends under Lorin Woolley's direction
who supposedly took the mantle of senior member from his father, John
Woolley, who'd died back in 1928. This 1932 council was composed of
Lorin Woolley, J. Leslie Broadbent, John Y. Barlow (very important
individual), Joseph Musser, Charles Zitting, LeGrand Woolley, and Louis
A. Kelsch.

Lorin Woolley, John Y. Barlow, and Joseph Musser were kind of the heads
honchos of the Council of Friends and the spearheaded the public
opposition to the LDS church. Joseph Musser was a prolific writer and in
refutation of the 1933 final manifesto he wrote a book titled "The New
and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage", marking a prominent shift in the
already strained relationship between the LDS church and the
fundamentalists.

From later in the same article on Mormonfundamentalism.com:

"The first hints were provided in a new book entitled The New and
Everlasting Covenant of Marriage authored by Joseph
Musser.[\[8\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn8#_edn8#_edn8#_edn8) 
Receiving the first editions months later in October, he promptly
"Mailed a copy to each of General Authorities, and placed some in the
Book
Stores."[\[9\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn9#_edn9#_edn9#_edn9) 
At that time, one devout polygamist, Charles Zitting, "was praying about
when the Church shall be set in order and a voice audibly told him 'That
the forces are not strong enough, but when Bro. Joseph's book comes out
the numbers will increase
rapidly.'"[\[10\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn10#_edn10#_edn10#_edn10) 

Musser spent the next week distributing more copies of The New and
Everlasting Covenant of
Marriage[\[11\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn11#_edn11#_edn11#_edn11) wherein
he explained that "there is a Priesthood organization greater than that
of the Church; and that Priesthood always has, can now and will continue
to function aside from and independent of the
Church."[\[12\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn12#_edn12#_edn12#_edn12) 
Joseph Musser's book provided the very first introduction to the idea
that there is a
PRIESTHOOD[\[13\]](http://www.mormonfundamentalism.com/archive/ChartLinks/CouncilofFriends.htm#_edn13#_edn13#_edn13#_edn13) organization
"above the Church, being God's power on earth."

The Council of Friends went by a number of names, but has always been
viewed by the adherents to these groups to be above any religion in
priesthood authority, superseding the authority of the Quorum of the
Twelve and LDS church Presidency. Most fundamentalist sects today still
adhere to some version of a council of friends with varying numbers from
one to as many as fourteen or more. It's just worth noting that
Woolley's original Council of Friends is where this authority was
originally claimed.

One person who is paramount to the foundation of the FLDS is a guy
briefly mentioned before, John Yates Barlow. Mormonfundamentalism.com
has a solid article on him and provides a nice summary of his early
history and attitudes towards polygamy.

"John Y. Barlow was born 4 March 1874, the son of Israel Barlow, an
ardent supporter of plural marriage both before and after the 1904
Second Manifesto.  John took his first plural wife in 1902, one more in
1918, and another in 1923.\[1\]  He served as a missionary in the
Northwestern States Mission where Apostle Melvin J. Ballard presided,
but secretly preached plural marriage to members and investigators.  In
1935, Ballard recalled: "Seventeen years ago, I discovered \[John Y.
Barlow\] was teaching polygamy out there among my missionaries.  I asked
him about it and he defended the idea so vigorously that I said to him:
'If you are such a strong advocate of it, you must be practicing it.' 
Barlow said, 'That's just what I've been doing.'"\[2\] Dishonorably
released and sent home early from his mission, he was later
excommunicated with Elder Ballard serving as a witness against
him.\[3\]  Nathaniel Baldwin met John in 1921, recording: "came home
from a little ride up the canyon\...  Young \[John Y.\] Barlow sat in
the back seat of the machine \[car\] with his two wives.  They seemed to
be happy and contented.  Young Barlow seemed to be also full of faith
and hope and seemed to be contented with his condition, being also cut
off the Church."

With any religious movement, infighting is expected and arguably
necessary for the growth and expansion of the group. The senior member
Lorin C. Woolley passed away in 1934, naming J. Leslie Broadbent his
rightful successor, who subsequently passed away in 1935. The ensuing
conflict created differing factions of fundamentalist sects.

"At Broadbent's death, two men made claim to be his rightful successor. 
Charles "Elden" Kingston, son of Charles W. Kingston, asserted that
Leslie had designated him as the "Second Elder." The Kingstons would
eventually establish the Davis County Cooperative Society, remaining
entirely separate from all other Mormon fundamentalist groups.

John Y. Barlow, who sat next in line in seniority of the Council of
Friends, also asserted his position as the "Senior Member."  Many also
believed that Broadbent had designated him as "Second Elder." 
Regardless, the majority of polygamists followed Barlow's leadership,
believing him to be the presiding priesthood leader on earth.  It was a
calling that he readily accepted."

John Yates Barlow now had his own faction of Mormon fundamentalism which
became the ruling body over the polygamists living in Short Creek.

The LDS church decided to capitalize on this momentary fracturing in
September of 1935. They went with a nuclear option to either bring the
polygamists into line with the LDS leadership or cut them off
permanently. They sent Stake President Claude Hirschi to Short Creek
with a powerful oath of fealty in hand. From Martha Bradley's "Kidnapped
from That Land: The Government Raids on the Short Creek Polygamists" on
page 57:

"Stake President Claude Hirschi presented to the members of the Short
Creek Branch a 'loyalty' oath designed to test their allegiance to
President Heber J. Grant and their conformity with the Church's
anti-polygamy stand. As reproduced in *Truth* magazine it stated:

'Short Creek, Arizona, September 7, 1935

To the Stake President and High Councils of Zion Park Stake and to Whom
It May Concern:

I, the undersigned member of Short Creek Branch of the Rockville Ward of
the Church of Jesus of Latter-day Saints, declare and affirm that I
WITHOUT ANY MENTAL RESERVATION WHATSOEVER SUPPORT THE PRESIDENCY OF THE
CHURCH and that I repudiate any intimation that any of the Presidency or
Apostles of the Church are living a double life, and that I denounce the
practice and advocacy of plural marriage as being out of harmony with
the declared principle of the Church at the time.'

Fundamentalists in the group, many of whom had entered into the
principle, unanimously refused to sign the document. Then they waited.
But not for long; partly because of their connections with the Barlow
group, that same day, 7 September 1935, the Zion Park Stake presidency
and high council moved to excommunicate twenty-one adult members of the
Short Creek Branch without a formal Church court, close the branch
altogether, and remove the Mormon Church from Short Creek, Arizona. They
dispensed with the traditional methods of Church adjudication which
would have allowed the defendants to present evidence and question the
witnesses."

And just like that, John Yates Barlow and the Council of Friends, in
response to the LDS church's nuclear option oath of fealty,
excommunicated the LDS church from Short Creek and removed any members
there who refused to adhere to the Council of Friends as their sole
leadership body. Like some kind of morbid amputation of a diseased limb,
this was cutting the final nerve connecting the two churches, creating
coevolving sects of Mormonism with wildly different goals in mind. The
one, to amass wealth and world-wide membership, the other to amass wives
and celestial glory while insulating themselves from the world.

On important issue raised in that 1935 oath of fealty which we haven't
really discussed is the accusations flying around about leadership of
the LDS church living double lives. We have to remember that this was in
1935 and plural marriages were solemnized underground in the LDS church
until the early 1910s. There were still a few of the LDS elite living in
the 1930s who had made the trek across the plains as children and lived
their whole lives under the law of celestial plural marriage. There were
still a number of practicing LDS who had been sealed to multiple wives
prior to the 1904 second manifesto, less than a generation before the
uprising of the Fundamentalist faction in Short Creek. There WERE LDS
leaders at this time living a double life. Any accusations this Council
of Friends was lobbing at HQ in SLC were founded in reality and for
legal and PR reasons, the LDS church needed those accusations to not be
true. They were still trying to erase their past with polygamy to be in
line with the constitution of Utah and the laws of the Federal
Government.

The division and strife between the LDS church and the Fundamentalists
would become the primary PR nightmare for the LDS church while the
Fundamentalists were just trying to practice what Joseph had taught was
the new and everlasting covenant to attain celestial glory. As the
churches evolved parallel to each other in different ways, the LDS
church fell further into line with mainstream Christianity and the FLDS
became deeper entrenched in their beliefs. The Utah and Arizona state
governments would make the laws known from time to time throughout a
series of raids spanning the rest of the 20^th^ century.

The most well-known of these raids on the FLDS is just known ominously
as the Short Creek Raid of 1953. This Short Creek Raid is truly a blight
on American history. Governor Howard Pyle of Arizona had been dealing
with the lawlessness of the FLDS who weren't paying many of their taxes
and decided to take action. There were also abundant rumors child-brides
being taken as polygamous wives well before reaching the age of 18,
which looks terrible for any governor if this is happening in their
state without any action being taken to mitigate these rampant statutory
violations.

One major issue to point out is that the FLDS was a group run by a few
selected elites in the movement. Those elites owned most of the
property, the majority of wives, and were also the most egregious
violators of state and federal laws. For this particular Short Creek
Raid, the Utah State Government took a back seat and let Arizona take
the lead. This single raid represented a confluence of completely
different world views coming into conflict with each other.

From the FLDS perspective: We're just trying to practice our religion in
a country which guarantees religious liberty and the free exercise
thereof. We don't recognize the federal government as having any
jurisdiction over the kingdom of God in Short Crik. We are living happy
lives in line with what God wants and we're endlessly persecuted by our
government.

From the Government's perspective: We've been dealing with this
religious cult for decades now and they've eluded the constraints of law
and paying all their taxes for far too long. These religious zealots are
marrying children and sex trafficking them across state lines. Their
standard of living is significantly lower than that of the rest of the
country and very few people here are educated in any secular schools.
Property is divided up among the people as the church sees fit but
they've given all their property to the church and none of their
marriages are legally binding so should a divorce happen; these poor
women and children have no legal recourse or right to their own
property. We have to do whatever possible to stop this cult from gaining
any more followers.

From the FLDS perspective: We have to do whatever necessary to follow
the prophet and keep living God's words and will.

These directly opposed viewpoints came to a head on 26 Jul 1953. The day
before, in order to keep the FLDS from being tipped off about the raid
and abandoning the settlement, the county deputies cut the single
telephone line going into the community. As dawn broke on the 26^th^,
someone had tipped the Mormons off and they had accepted their fate.
They gathered in the schoolhouse and began singing hymns while they sent
the little children out to play in the yard surrounding the schoolhouse
as the sun began to rise on the community.

102 armed and uniformed police officers and members of the Arizona
National Guard flooded into the community and made the largest mass
arrest in American history. Of the more than 400 inhabitants of the
town, only 6 people weren't taken into custody. 263 children and over
120 adults were rounded up and thrown into buses. Governor Howard Pyle
tried to spin this as a battle against insurrection opposed to
Government control and more than 100 independent newspaper reporters
were present during the raid. The produced multiple effects, mostly
negative against the Governor and police officers who gave the children
into the hands of already overwhelmed social workers. For the next 2
weeks, newspaper front pages were filled with pictures of crying
children being ripped from the hands of screaming mothers with men being
led away in handcuffs.

Headlines read like the dawning of a war on American soil. "Police
operation at Short Creek like military raid on enemy post," "State
marshals its forces in effort to wipe out plural marriage practices of
United Effort cult," "Short Creek cult SMASHED by Pyle" and they go on
and on and on. More than 90 percent of the adults charged prior to the
raid were taken into custody and a bitter legal battle ensued at the
same time a massive PR nightmare gripped Governor Pyle and the states of
Arizona and Utah.

From the Arizona Republic the day after the raid:

"Highly Competent investigators have been unable to find a single
instance in the last decade of a girl child's reaching the age of 15
without having been forced into a shameful mockery of marriage.

The State of Arizona is fulfilling today one of every state's deepest
obligations---to protect and defend the helpless.

The State is moving at once to seek through the courts the custody of
these 263 children, all under the age of 18. They are the innocent
chattles of a lawless commercial undertaking of wicked design and
ruthlessly exercised power. This in turn is the cooperative enterprise
of five or six coldly calculating men who direct all of the operations
and reap all of the profits, and are the evil heart of the insurrection
itself."

Governor Pyle's official statement reads as follows:

"Before dawn today the State of Arizona began and now has substantially
concluded a momentous police action against insurrection within its own
borders.

Arizona has mobilized and used its total police power to protect the
lives and future of 263 children. They are the product and the victims
of the foulest conspiracy you could possibly imagine.

More than 100 peace officers moved into Short Creek, in Mohave County,
at 4 o'clock this morning. They have arrested almost the entire
population of a community dedicated to the production of white slaves
who are without hope of escaping this degrading slavery from the moment
of their birth."

I recommend you do a newspaper archive search with keywords Short Creek
for 1953 so you can read some of the articles I've filled my mind with.
It gives one a realistic sense for the public perception and widespread
outcry for legally orphaning 263 children through the avenue of what
many considered government overreach and discrimination against a
specific religion.

The LDS Church back in SLC was one of the very few media outlets which
commended the actions of Governor Pyle, even in spite of the significant
public outcry against what had happened. The LDS church couldn't have
been more pleased with this raid on their enemies. From their Jul 27
1953 publication we find gems such as these:

"Law-abiding citizens of Utah and Arizona owe a debt of gratitude to
Arizona's Governor Howard Pyle and to his police officers who, Sunday,
raided the polygamous settlement at Short Creek and rounded up its
leaders for trial. The existence of this community on our border has
been an embarrassment to our people and a smudge on the reputations of
our two great states. We hope Governor Pyle will make good his pledge to
eradicate the illegal practices conducted there "before they become a
cancer of a sort that is beyond hope of human repair."

"Any individuals who may once have been members of the LDS church and
who have engaged in the practices which prompted the raid by the
Government of the State of Arizona have apostatized or have been
excommunicated from the Church. They are in no way connected with the
Church and are living in open defiance of its doctrines and the laws of
the land. As one of its fundamental tenets, the Chruch teaches that its
members believe '...in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law.'"

"Again, we commend the Governor for his forthright efforts. We have full
confidence that the rights of the innocent will be protected, the
accused will be given a fair trial, and we hope the unfortunate
activities at Short Creek will be cleaned up once and for all."

So much to parse out of that editorial from the LDS owned Deseret News.

First, the LDS church called the FLDS an embarrassment to Utah and
Arizona, I'd be willing to bet the FLDS saw the LDS church in the same
light and wished the same fate to befall them, but the LDS wasn't
infracting upon the law as fragrantly as the FLDS so they weren't really
in danger of something like that happening.

Second, the LDS church clearly wanted the FLDS eradicated in line with
what Governor Pyle had said about them becoming a cancer beyond hope of
repair. To think that the LDS church had no dog in this fight would be
hilariously ignorant. If their nearest geographical competitor for
prophetic claims was to be taken out by the government, that removes the
FLDS from common parlance of religious sectarianism and leaves many
people believing in the BoM to be soaked up by the ever-hungry LDS
church. The ideological divides between the churches seems to fall away
when there are unattended sheep to be absorbed by the shepherd with the
already larger flock.

Third, the Deseret News article never said anything about polygamy, they
beat around the bush. They said individuals who engaged in practices
which prompted the raid, never hitting the nail on the head in saying
those people who practice polygamy are in apostasy. "They are in no way
connected with the Church and are living in open defiance of its
doctrines". This is the active distancing the LDS church was trying to
do, trying not to take any splash damage from this explosion in the
media. The FLDS and its adherents had been excommunicated back in 1935,
but they failed to mention that the FLDS had also excommunicated the LDS
church at the same time. Whoever delivers the wrath of God holds the
real authority so I can understand them casting condemnation from their
superior legal position. But, that last part, where the church said the
FLDS is living in open defiance to church doctrine, that's simply not
true. The LDS church is the one living in defiance to their own
doctrine. D&C 132 still sits in part of the Mormon canon and it's very
explicit that polygyny is necessary to get to the highest degree of the
celestial kingdom. The LDS church ignores this or doesn't actively
practice it so they can remain in peaceful harmony with the government,
but you can be certain that half a century before this the LDS church
was openly practicing polygamy which is exactly what Joseph commanded
them to do. I would further postulate that if polygamy is decriminalized
in the near future that the LDS church will be happy to jump right back
on that D&C 132 bandwagon. None of the manifestos retracted the
doctrine, they just suspend it until U.S. law falls into line with their
own doctrine.

A quick thought exercise for you, let's say polygamy is decriminalized
next week. With a magic wave of the legal wand and no lobbying from the
church one way or another, let's just make it legal for this
hypothetical, how would that change the church's missionary efforts in
other countries where polygamy is still illegal? Would they encourage
people to move to the United States to be able to legally practice the
new and everlasting covenant? Would they encourage people to practice it
in private in spite of what the government says just as Joseph, Brigham,
John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff did? Or would they decry polygamy as
being counter to God's will in spite of what their canon says? Maybe
this is a conversation we'll revisit in the future. Feel free to weigh
in if you'd like on facebook or twitter, I personally have no idea
what's most plausible.

Finally, fourth to parse out of the Deseret News article, the LDS church
hoped that Governor Pyle would clean up the FLDS once and for all. What
does that look like? What was the LDS leadership hoping for? Did they
want the FLDS to be legally disbanded as a church? Did they want all the
leadership locked up for life? Once again this is an example of the LDS
church lobbing media bombs at a smaller cousin religion from their
higher status as publicly acceptable.

If we can learn anything from the history of the LDS church in Utah,
it's that it takes a REALLY heavy dose of persecution all at one time to
actually snuff out a religion. If even one little sprout remains alive,
the religion will continue to flourish and the persecution will only
fertilize the religious soil and galvanize the followers to more
viciously oppose whatever force is persecuting them. The public was so
appalled by the governor's iron-fisted approach to dealing with the FLDS
and all the pictures of children being ripped from the arms of their
parents who were being placed in handcuffs came back to haunt him during
his 1954 reelection campaign and he lost his seat to Democratic underdog
Ernest McFarland. Pyle blamed the FLDS raid the previous year for his
loss.

Persecution or prosecution, depending on which side of the belief
spectrum you find yourself on, against the FLDS and its leadership
continued. By 1954 there were three main factions of polygamist sects.
Overlooking a significant amount of confusion about the proper leader
and who was legitimately ordained to be the leader, Elden Kingston had
broken off from the leadership vacuum left behind by J. Leslie
Broadbent's death and formed the Kingston group known as the Latter Day
Church of Christ. John Yates Barlow had called Leroy Johnson and Rulon
Jeffs to be members of his Council of Friends and Barlow was the primary
leader until his death in 1949. The 1953 raid on Short Creek upset a lot
of people and incarcerated most of the leadership of the FLDS apart from
the Kingston group which didn't suffer anything during the raid as they
were located further north in Utah. Rulon Allred had been affiliated
with the writer Joseph Musser since 1935. Joseph Musser was the sacred
glue which held the fundamentalist leadership together. He passed away
in 1954, a year after the infamous Short Creek raid and the ensuing
chaos fractured the Fundamentalist groups again. Rulon Allred claimed to
be the rightful successor and formed the Apostolic United Brethren (AUB)
with their own priesthood Council of Friends, and Leroy S. Johnson took
leadership of the original FLDS faction formed in Short Creek. John
Barlow had also called Rulon Jeffs into his FLDS Council of Friends
priesthood leadership group.

Leroy Johnson took leadership of the FLDS during the confusion following
Musser's death in 1954 and led the FLDS until his death in 1986. Before
we get into the more modern history of the FLDS, we need to briefly
introduce one of the primary confounding factors to all of these groups
and that was land and property ownership. These Fundamentalist groups
practiced the fundamental tenet of Mormonism known as the new and
everlasting covenant, a euphemism for polygamy. They also attempted in
some instances to practice the United Order, a doctrine introduced by
Joseph Smith in 1834 of communalistic ownership of property. Around
1925, 2 decades before Joseph Musser's death and most of the prominent
splits happened, the polygamist sects created the United Effort Plan.

The United Effort Plan (UEP), was the dedicated trust for members'
property to be deeded over to which was controlled by the Council of
Friends. Basically, if you were a Mormon fundamentalist and you owned
property, the Council of Friends required that you give that property to
the church and they divvied it out as they saw fit. Some version of the
UEP survives in most of the fundamentalist sects as it was taught as a
fundamental tenet by Joseph Smith.

These common property trusts do nothing but cause confusion and
concentrate the entire community's wealth into the hands of the elites
of the given group. Any time the state has tried to step in to curtail
the control or enforce laws on the leadership of these groups, these
trusts have usually been a central issue to draw the attention of the
government and cause chaos and confusion. When it comes to paying taxes,
the trusts only create more problems because the average follower
doesn't have much if any property legally in their name, but they live
in housing and drive vehicles which require tax to be collected on,
which they usually pay into the trust with the assumption that the trust
is paying those taxes on the property they're using. Often the second
step doesn't happen so the people living in the houses are foreclosed on
because the leadership isn't paying the taxes, but it's the average
follower who suffers the wrath of the government for not paying taxes.

These communalist trusts are something to keep in mind throughout the
entirety of understanding the legal issues with the fundamentalist
groups, most of them share it in common and it only creates headaches
for everybody.

To zoom back into our timeline, upon Leroy Johnson's death in 1986,
Rulon Jeffs became the leader of the FLDS and instated Winston Blackmore
as the sole trustee over the polygamist sects in British Colombia as
long as he keeps in line with the FLDS and looks to the Jeffs family as
the sole religious leaders.

One quick addition to throw in here before getting to Warren Jeffs; the
1953 raid was the most prominent and publicly circulated PR nightmare of
all the raids on the fundamentalist groups. It wasn't the only raid
though. As early as the 1940s the government had been mounting small
raids on various groups including those in Short Creek, but 1953 was the
largest and it cut the deepest scars into the collective psyche of the
groups. There were subsequent smaller raids in the 80s which were
largely unsuccessful in curtailing abuse, but did reopen the scars from
the big 1953 raid.

The FLDS has been our primary focus, and we've only mentioned other
groups in the periphery so far, but that's what happens when you try to
cover 100 years of history in just an hour. Here's a brief list of other
polygamist and fundamentalist Mormon groups which had brief lives or
even exist to this day.

One of the largest is the Kingston group founded by Charles and Eldon
Kingston. Today it's led by Elden Kingston's son, Paul Elden Kingston
who's been the leader since 1987.

There's the Apostolic United Brethren, known as the Allred Group,
founded when Rulon Allred was refused admission into the council of
friends in the late 1940s. Today it's led by Lynn A. Thompson who took
the mantle of leadership in 2014 from J. LaMoine Jensen, who'd been
leading it since 2005. He was the first non-Allred leader of the group
who took the mantle from Rulon's son, Owen, who'd been leader of the AUP
since 1977.

There's also the Centennial Park group founded by J. Marion Hammon in
1983 after Leroy Johnson dismissed them from the FLDS. They're also
known as the Second Ward and they consider the FLDS in Short Creek to be
the First Ward.

There's also one major tangent we haven't even brought up yet, and
that's the LeBaron group founded by Alma Dayer LeBaron, Sr., as a
separate stake from Joseph Musser's Council of Friends group in 1936.
LeBaron's sons were excommunicated for teaching plural marriage in 1944,
after which they closely affiliated with Rulon Allred's Apostolic United
Brethren. In 1955, Joel LeBaron organized the Church of the Firstborn of
the Fulness of Times in Salt Lake City.

There's also the Church of Jesus Christ in Solemn Assembly, another Utah
based fundamentalist group. It was founded in 1977 by a man named Alex
Joseph, but after his death in 1998 the group seems to have dissolved.

Another group known as the Church of the Firstborn and the General
Assembly of Heaven is a fairly recent group founded as a breakoff of the
LDS church in Magna, Utah in 2001, led by a man named Terrill R. Dalton
who runs the sect to this day.

There are dozens of others and I've probably missed a number of rather
prominent sects. The main takeaway I offer with this list is that Mormon
fundamentalism is like Green Jello. You can try to squash it, change its
form, hit it with a hammer, no matter what you try to do, Mormon
fundamentalism and polygamy only spreads and separates into smaller
factions, making them increasingly harder to track and police for any
abuses, sexual, child labor, tax related, or otherwise.

Let's go ahead and broach one of the central focuses for today's episode
to finish out. Warren Jeffs is a challenging icon of Mormon
fundamentalism to wrap one's mind around. Today's examination of Warren
Jeffs only hits on a few high points to understand some of the most
prominent features of his history. I've gained some personal opinions of
Jeffs which I'll briefly share once we know a bit more about the man,
but I would encourage you all to look him up with resources provided in
the show notes to gain your own nuanced understanding of him. Hopefully
the information I present will offer you a basis for why I have my
opinions about him.

Let's start at the beginning. Warren Steed Jeffs was born 4 Dec 1955 to
Rulon Jeffs and Marilyn Steed. He was called as a counselor to his
father, Rulon, upon reaching marriageable and leadership age. In 2002,
Rulon Jeffs, at the age of 92, died and Warren became the new leader.
However conservative Rulon was in keeping the FLDS groups isolated from
the outside gentile world, Warren cranked everything up another few
notches. A few powerful reforms came into place when Warren took the
mantle. He called for all members to wear clothes only made by
themselves, no outside books, no gentile music, no internet, and he
effectively cut off all communication with the outside world. He also
commanded all the members to pull their children from the public
education system in lieu of homeschooling, an order to which they
promptly complied.

Warren also excommunicated Winston Blackmore as head trustee of the
British Columbia sect of FLDS and absorbed all his wives and children
into his harem and bringing the Canadian polygamists deeper under his
control.

The rise of Warren Jeffs coincided with Utah Attorney General Mark
Shurtleff's crackdown on polygamy. In October 2003 he passed polygamy
reform through Utah courts which further criminalized polygamy with
steeper sentences and he announced a sweeping investigation of the
Hilldale police force, recommending decertification of any police
officers with more than one wife.

2003 was a hard year for Warren Jeffs, but it was nothing compared to
2004. In mid-2004, a nephew of Jeffs, Brent Jeffs, filed a lawsuit
against Jeffs alleging sexual abuse as a child perpetrated by Warren.

Also in 2004, Jeffs cleansed the leadership and made himself the sole
sealing authority in the group so all marriages would require approval
of Jeffs and nobody else. He excommunicated 21 men from Short Creek,
including the mayor, and reassigned their wives and children, taking
many of them for himself. He also absorbed all their personal property
into the UEP and required them to be physically removed from the
community.

By the end of 2004, Jeffs was beginning to hear rumors of an impending
arrest and began spending much of his time in hiding.

2005 was a much harder year for Jeffs. There's truly no way I can convey
to you just how large of a criminal empire Jeffs was amidst constructing
at this time. In June 2005, Jeffs was charged with sexual assault on a
minor with an added conspiracy to commit sexual misconduct for arranging
underage marriages. He was formally indicted on sexual assault charges
in July of 2005 while on the lam. Utah's Attorney General, Mark
Shurtleff, ordered the freezing of the UEP's assets which amounted to
more than \$100 million. At this time, Jeffs and the FLDS elite were
dealing mainly in cash, often carrying in excess of \$100k on their
person. Warren's brother, Seth, was arrested under suspicion of
harboring his brother as a fugitive of the law during a routine traffic
stop. He was found with nearly \$142k in cash and about \$7k worth of
prepaid debit cards. The state of Arizona placed a \$10k bounty on his
head. The state of Utah also charged him with fleeing prosecution for
evading court indictments and staying in hiding.

In early April 2006, the state of Utah issued a warrant for Jeffs arrest
on felony charges of accomplice statutory rape of a teenage girl and the
following month the FBI placed Jeffs on their top ten most wanted
fugitives list and raised the bounty to \$100k. It was expected that he
was travelling at any given time with faithful armed guards to ensure
safe travels in hiding.

In June of 2006 Jeffs returned to Colorado City Arizona to perform
marriage ceremonies as he was the only man with sealing authority. It's
understood at this time Jeffs had taken more than 70 wives. An anonymous
website posted recent pictures of him celebrating with new child brides
as young as 12 in Short Creek. Authorities knew he was in only a few
possible areas and were on heightened alert.

Finally, on 28 August 2006, in true crime lord fashion, Jeffs was pulled
over in his iconic brand new red Cadillac Escalade for not displaying
his temporary plates. You can find an article with pictures in the show
notes of the arrest. He was found with one of his wives and his brother,
and had in the car 4 laptops, 16 burner cell phones, multiple disguises,
and more than \$55k in cash.

Following his arrest, Jeffs faced 2 counts of felony accomplice to rape
charges in Utah. After conviction of those charges, Arizona was next to
charge him on two different accomplice to rape accounts, and 8 other
counts including sexual assault on a minor and incest.

His Utah conviction was reversed and he was transported to Arizona for
trial. The Arizona state prosecutors claimed it would be impractical and
unnecessary to try Jeffs in Arizona as the witnesses no longer wanted to
testify against him and he'd spent 2 years in prison already.

Finally on August 9, 2011, Jeffs was convicted on two counts of sexual
assault of a child and sentenced to life plus 20 and a \$10k fine by the
Texas Department of Criminal Justice. He becomes eligible for parole in
2038 at the age of 83.

Viewing Warren Jeffs' colorful career as prophet the way we did is like
staring at a vast mountain range from our historical peak and only
paying attention to the few peaks that rise above the misty fjord while
ignoring all the smaller peaks and valleys that add depth and character
to his life. We could spend hours of this podcast talking about just
Warren Jeffs, and our historical timeline may get there one day, but
don't hold your breath. Let me offer a few closing points of Jeffs'
doctrine and teachings left behind as his true legacy before adding my
own thoughts.

Jeffs had and still has complete dictatorial control over his adherents.
He controls what they wear, who they associate with, who they're allowed
to marry, and all information going in and out of the FLDS communes. He
forces men and women to dress simply in clothes they make for themselves
which look exactly like you'd expect. No piercings, tattoos, or
distinguishing characteristics are allowed.

He requires all members to be home-schooled and the children are
dramatically lacking in fundamental learning compared to their secular
counterparts. All property, even to this day, is consecrated to the
church's United Effort Plan which all funnels up to the elite and
eventually into Jeffs own pockets. The UEP has since been taken over by
a non-FLDS trustee, who deals with the tangled mess Jeffs spun for his
adherents, which only further fuels the persecution narrative.

Jeffs also encourages the FLDS to take advantage of government welfare
programs like the general welfare fund, food stamps, and the WIC
program. This takes money from the government and further funnels it
straight to Jeffs and his wealthy elite while the majority of FLDS
families consistently struggle to put food on their tables.

Now we get to some of the more salacious aspects of his legacy. With a
roughly 50/50 split in population, there's always a dramatic shortage of
women to give to the elites, creating colonies of what are known as Lost
Boys, who are faithful FLDS young men, excommunicated for simple lack of
female resources.

Jeffs also taught of blood atonement. If any gentile or apostate commits
certain sins, they can only pay for it through the shedding of blood.
Simply apostatizing from the FLDS can incur the wrath of blood
atonement.

The UEP also owns a few manufacturing plants in or near Short Creek.
Much of the work is done by child labor and the people are either paid
such a pathetic little pittance of a wage so as to be considered
offensive by any objective observer, or they're simply not paid at all,
making it very challenging to distinguish from child slave labor.

Before Jeffs was arrested, in 2005 the Southern Poverty Law Center added
the FLDS to its list of hate groups and Jeffs is a notoriously bigoted
man. Some quotes attributed to him the SPLC used to put the FLDS on
their list:

"The black race is the people through which the devil has always been
able to bring evil unto the earth.\"

\"\[Cain was\] cursed with a black skin and he is the father of the
Negro people. He has great power, can appear and disappear. He is used
by the devil, as a mortal man, to do great evils.\"

\"If you marry a person who has connections with a Negro, you would
become cursed.\"

Homosexuality: \"The people grew so evil, the men started to marry the
men and the women married the women. This is the worst evil act you can
do, next to murder. It is like murder. Whenever people commit that sin,
then the Lord destroys them.\"

Role of women: \"I have been instructed that any young man who will not
leave our girls alone is to be sent away and not allowed to be among us,
even before they destroy the girl."

Given everything we've discussed today, I want to share a few parting
thoughts. Warren Jeffs is given the label of that one crazy
fundamentalist polygamist FLDS guy who's serving life in prison. He's a
religious zealot who uses his religion to practice polygamy.

One striking thing about learning so much of polygamy history for the
past little while is a recurring thought I can't seem to shake. Keeping
polygamy outlawed as it currently stands is simply impractical and
causes too much damage. We shouldn't condemn or convict Jeffs based on
polygamy, he lied, stole millions of dollars from over 10,000 people,
committed widespread fraud in multiple states, raped, tortured men and
women, boys and girls, he brainwashed people, and did unthinkable things
we'll never have provable documentation of. He did plenty of terrible
things while prophet of the FLDS and we can condemn him for everything
else even without factoring polygamy into the equation.

There were 2 subsequent raids on the FLDS Short Creek area, one in 2008,
the other in 2010. The 2008 raid, reminiscent of the 1953 raid, 439
children were taken into the custody of Texas Child Protective services.
The 2010 raid turned up in very few arrests and no prosecutions. But
let's hone in on Jeffs alone and ignore his equally dastardly elites.

The truth of the matter is, Utah and Arizona both had a very hard time
convicting him and both states ended up throwing out the cases, it was
Texas which passed down the 2 rape charge judgement landing him life in
prison. Why?! This man has more than 70 documentable wives and there's
absolutely no way of knowing that's accurate, and you mean to tell me
that every single other one of those marriages are with informed
consenting adults?! 2 RAPE CHARGES when he'd been raping children and
teenagers for half a decade while at the same time stealing their
property and brainwashing them?! The state prosecutors botched the Jeffs
conviction! The prosecuting attorneys, Attorney General Mark Shurtleff,
and everybody involved in the case handled Jeffs with the kid gloves and
now he's spending his time locked in a cage away from society where he
belongs, but he still provides divine directives to his followers from
prison! Yeah, the FLDS isn't done! They still have property all over.
The residents of Short Creek expect him to be miraculously released from
prison and Jesus to return all in one fell swoop. The most faithful have
moved to a compound in South Dakota where they're even more isolated
from the outside world than they were in Short Creek and don't allow any
outsiders in. The FLDS Hydra has only grown more heads with the removal
of Jeffs and the persecution narrative only further galvanizes and
entrenches the average believer which feeds into the perpetual
isolation.

In my opinion, Warren Jeffs is a deplorable human being with no regard
for how his actions damage the lives of his thousands of followers. He
is utterly reprehensible. In a world with increasingly fewer heroes,
he's a black-blooded villain responsible for ruining the lives and
stealing the property of every FLDS follower. Why do they follow him?!
Because he's. THEIR. PROPHET! Why did the government go so easy on an
obvious crime lord? Same answer, because he's. a. PROPHET.

Warren Jeffs is a man claiming to speak to and for God through divine
revelation, living communalism, fervently believing in the religious
teachings of the Bible, Book of Mormon, and D&C, wrote his own religious
books his followers eagerly devour when they can barely afford to feed
their families. He's been chased from town to town while hiding from the
law for committing atrocities and has spun it all into the religious
persecution narrative. He's built a temple to perform sealing practices
in Texas. He claims to be the one person on earth who is truly led by
God while all other religions are false and led by corruption. The truth
of the matter is, Warren Jeffs forces Mormonism to stare itself right in
the mirror. I dare you to find a better analogue to Joseph Smith.

Personally, I condemn Jeffs for everything he did, especially for raping
children. But the facts are that he got a Mormon religious exemption in
the courts. You put his rap sheet on a man named Jose Alvarez, Tony
Dellamony, or Muhammed Khaibir and you have a completely different
conviction. But because Jeffs is Mormon and committed his atrocities in
an area where the government and prosecution are largely Mormon, they
can only stick him with 2 accomplice to rape charges and a fine for
\$10,000? I'm sorry, what?! WHAT ABOUT EVERYTHING ELSE?!

The hardest part about all of this is that he's the public face of
polygamy, but Jeffs does NOT define polygamy, he is a malicious,
child-raping predator. It's pretty simple to condemn Jeffs and not
condemn polygamy at the same time. Jeffs is defined by his polygamy, or
at least he's labeled as barely more than such, but what about all the
truly heinous and misanthropic deeds he actually committed deserving of
truly terrible labels? How about fraud? Con-man? Sexual assaulter?
Thief? Predator? Warren Jeffs is a degraded, deceitful, pathetic
parasite of a human being who relies on fear and intimidation or
untestable claims of divinity to achieve his ends. He's not creative.
He's never done anything an objective observer would consider a
commendable act of altruism. He's done nothing but lie cheat steal and
rape, but at least he was convicted for 2 rape charges and he has to pay
\$10,000 for everything he did. HOW IS THAT FAIR?!

Only religion would allow him the loophole he squeaked through while the
states largely ignored the system which empowered him to do what he did.
So the 2008 raid rescued over 400 children from the cult and we cut one
head off the FLDS leadership, big win, right? What about the other 6,000
people who live under his foot and still look to his prison cell to get
their divine directives from on high? I don't fault any single person
for allowing a man like Warren Jeffs to rise, I fault the ideology and
dogma which fostered the reality that made his rise and crime spree
possible, and it's the same ideology and dogma which protected him from
a harsher sentence once he was in cuffs; RELIGION!

This just broke last night on KUTV.com

"Six Mormon families suing LDS church over alleged cover up of child
sexual abuse"

"The \[six\] families allege LDS leaders knew one of their members was
abusing children and actively covered up the abuse that continued for
years. The case is scheduled to go to trial in January.

Helen is one of the plaintiffs and spoke to KUTV's sister station in
Washington D.C.---asking that only her first name be used---and said she
reported the abuse of her 4 and 6-year-old children to her bishop, the
leader of her Martinsburg, West Virginia congregation, and the top
women's leader called the relief society president, who was also the
abuser's mother. She said they didn't believer her and they didn't do
anything."

The brief states as follows:

"The \[LDS church\]...knew that it had a sex offender in its midst as
early as December 2004-January 2005, when Michael Jensen was charged in
Provo, Utah, with felony sexual abuse of two girls and pled guilty to
two sex offenses in the presence of his parents (who became Church
leaders) and a Church bishop in Provo."

The article continues:

"It says that instead of warning others about Jensen, even as his
predations began to mount, local church leaders "covered up, minimized
and denied" his abuse and "Dangerous proclivities; sponsored false
explanations when evidence of abuse surfaced; touted him as a
trustworthy and exceptional member of the Church community."

These stories are a dime a dozen! Religion is the last bastion
protecting bigotry and child molesters and the most egregious examples
become a Warren Jeffs who never properly pays society back for all the
damage he's inflicted. At some point we have to ask ourselves, if the
best religion has to offer us is a sense of community we can get through
other means, but everything we've discussed today is some of the worst
religion can create, is the tradeoff worth it?

We shouldn't be so naïve as to paint all of polygamy with the same
brush. This is patriarchal, religious polygamy. As soon as you taint
real polygamy with religion it becomes a system designed to oppress
women and trade them as property, and the wealthiest get the most
property. Some of my best friends are polyamorous and they lead
incredibly happy and healthy lives and they're very well educated and
really good parents because their relationships fill the three criteria
of informed consenting adults. None of those boxes are checked when it
comes to somebody like Warren Jeffs.

The religious community may not want to see an example like Jeffs and
consider themselves on the same spectrum as he, but all of them are. And
the only way to show people just how twisted and disgusting some
religion can be is by pointing out the similar faults in all religion.
Shine the spotlight on religions faults. Don't criminalize polygamy
because happy people engage in secular poly relationships every day and
keeping it criminalized only fuels the persecution complex and forces
religious cults into compounds so they can effectively separate their
sheep from the rest of enlightened society. Shame on the government for
letting Jeffs and his elite get off with so much. Shame on religion for
creating a world where the things Jeffs did are somehow excusable. Shame
on humanity for not taking a tougher stand against a truly evil human
being.

To think that Jeffs somehow didn't know what he was doing or to claim he
sincerely believes himself to be a prophet of God carves out some kind
of exception for psychopathic and sociopathic behavior. If you have any
reservations about his sincerely held religious beliefs, I'll leave you
with some audio posted by my friend, Jonathan Streeter, Thinker of
Thoughts on his youtube channel of a video released by the Washington
Utah County Attorney's office of an interaction between Warren and his
brother, Nephi in 2007.

The next few episodes will be interviews I've amassed during my time
researching the subject of Mormon polygamy. We'll jump back into the
historical timeline in the new year.

Thanks and closeout.
