---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 54 – The Spalding Virus'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-54-spalding-virus/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-54-the-spalding-virus
category: History
date: 2017-06-15 01:35:26 +0000
---

Ep 54 -- The Spalding Virus

On this episode, we'll be talking about the PR nightmare that was the
Spalding theory as it embodied a new resurgence in the public eye.
Spalding's wife, Matilda Davison, and Hingepin Sidney Rigdon went at it
in a public letter exchange where she laid out the theory claiming the
Book of Mormon came from her late husband's fiction and Rigdon responds
with ad hominem attacks and blatant lies. After that we follow up on the
conversation with Charone Frankel from last week's episode.

Links:

B.H. Roberts The Book of Mormon pt 3\
<http://www.solomonspalding.com/docs2/Rob1905a.htm>

Susan Black on Nauvoo population\
<http://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3025&context=byusq>

Full text of "Manuscript Story---Conneaut Creek\
<https://archive.org/stream/themanuscriptsto00spauuoft/themanuscriptsto00spauuoft_djvu.txt>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Intro June 15, 2017

Little bit of house cleaning here. In order to create a little more
consistency with what you'll hear in each episode, instead of doing one
hour and a half history episode every two weeks and having a
conversation or headline episode on the opposing two weeks, for the sake
of digestibility and consistency, we're going to start doing a shorter
historical timeline segment every episode along with other segments
sprinkled in afterwards. If you're here for the historical timeline,
you'll be getting it every week, and if you're here for everything this
show offers other than the historical timeline, you'll be getting that
every week too.

When we left off our last historical timeline segment, Jo and friends
were amidst petitioning a judge for a grand jury hearing to override the
legal debacle that was the November court of inquiry. The Mormons felt
as if they were treated unfairly because they didn't get any opportunity
to voice their defense in response to the prosecution. That's not really
how courts of inquiry or grand jury hearings work, so it may have felt
unfair but that's just how the legal system was set up and they were
going through the correct legal channels which fittingly landed them in
Liberty Jail in the first place.

Of course, because the whole Mormon situation was toxic to anybody who
came anywhere close to it, Judge Thompkins, who heard the Mormons in the
grand jury hearing, heard the prosecution and charged Jo and friends
with everything the court of inquiry had charged previously, but nobody
wanted the whole thing to go to trial. If a large public trial of the
Mormons went down it would uncover a lot of bad decisions made by the
Missouri government because nobody was in the right and everybody had
made illegal mistakes throughout all of 1838 in Missouri.

A solution came in the form of a transfer to Boone county. Sheriff
William Morgan took custody of the prisoners, the same Morgan whose
house the Mormons had surrounded back in the summer of '38, and Jo
bribed Morgan and his men with \$800 and a bunch of whiskey to let them
go. Jo, Hyrum, Baldwin, McRae, and Wight all affected their escapes and
made it to Quincy, Illinois.

Upon their arrival, it was a sight to behold. Rigdon had set up shop
renting a small farm from Isaac Galland, the same guy who owned all the
land Jo said he would buy once he was released; Bloody Brigham Young had
been handling all ecclesiastical matters including holding a church
court designating over a dozen people who were to be excommunicated for
testifying against Jo and the church in the court of inquiry, and nobody
had any sense of direction or permanence.

The Mormons were beginning their trials and tribulations once again in a
brand-new place, working with a clean slate in Illinois, which whets our
palette with the milk in preparation for the meat of today's episode.

Milk to Meat

It was early May in Quincy, Illinois when the prophet arrived to the
scattered camps, having escaped custody of the state of Missouri. The
constant fluctuation from cold nights to muggy springtime swamp heat was
a nice break from the bitter winter the Saints had suffered through
during their exodus from Missouri. The prophet and his counselors were
constantly busy with travels and meetings to properly establish the
Mormons in Illinois where they hoped to be safe from persecution. Of the
10,000+ Mormons who were now settling in parts of Illinois and Iowa,
most were eagerly trying to locate themselves to some stable tract of
land to plant crops for the season as they were in desperate need of
staple resources. However, among all the problems the Saints were
dealing with, controversy once again began wreaking havoc on their
beliefs.

In 1833, Doctor Philastus Hurlbut, Doctor Phil as we called him back in
episode 29, began his expose of Mormonism, having come into contact with
information that the Book of Mormon may have been wholly plagiarized
from a manuscript written by Solomon Spalding. Many of you listening may
be familiar with this theory or may recall it from when we've discussed
it previously, but for any new listeners out there, here's a quick
crash-course to get us primed for the public letter exchanges published
in 1839 that we'll be reading today.

Hurlbut was a faithful member of the church and was called on a mission
to proselyte in Ohio, specifically in a little town named Conneaut. Upon
his arrival, he began preaching from the Book of Mormon which was met
with chastisement from the crowd. Many people who'd known a man named
Solomon Spalding, who'd died in 1816, recognized some of the story as
similar to what Spalding was writing prior to his death. One man in the
crowd, a respected justice of the peace in the area, shouted "ol come to
pass has come to life again" or something to that effect, implying that
came to pass was something Spalding included frequently in his story,
"Manuscript Found".

Upon hearing this, Hurlbut went back and asked the Mormon leadership
some hard questions about the claims of the Conneaut townsfolk and was
subsequently excommunicated for 'unchristianlike conduct with women'.
Thus began a year's long research and preaching tour where Doctor Phil
went to important individuals to get affidavits about Joseph Smith or
Spalding's manuscript. This research, once collected, was sold to Eber
Howe, editor of the Painesville telegraph newspaper a mere 10 miles from
Kirtland, and Mormonism Unvailed was published at the end of 1834 with
all of Hurlbut's research intact. This established the foundation for
the Spalding theory, claiming that Joseph Smith and Hingepin Sidney
Rigdon had colluded together to publish the plagiarized Book of Mormon
and found the Mormon religion.

After Howe's book was published, pandora's box had been cracked and it
was only a matter of time before the theory gained enough public
awareness that the church leadership could no longer ignore it. Tension
was bubbling under the surface and needed only a small catalyst to once
again enter the public eye. In May of 1839, amidst all the chaos of the
Mormons beginning to settle Commerce Illinois and the surrounding areas,
a statement was published in the Boston Recorder and subsequently picked
up by many smaller local publications which reopened investigations into
the Spalding theory, finally requiring a response from the Mormon
leadership. The statement was a signed affidavit from Spalding's wife
who'd remarried soon after Solomon's death, donning the legal name,
Matilda Spalding Davison. Here are a few excerpts from her statement,
and we'll talk about what this means as we go through it.

ALLEGED STATEMENT OF MRS. DAVISON,\
FORMERLY THE WIFE OF SOLOMON SPAULDING.

\"As the Book of Mormon, or Golden Bible (as it was originally called)
has excited much attention, and is deemed by a certain new sect of equal
authority with the Sacred Scriptures, I think it a duty which I owe to
the public to state what I know touching its origin.\
\
\"That its claims to a divine origin are wholly unfounded needs no proof
to a mind unperverted by the grossest illusions. That any sane person
should rank it higher than any other merely human composition is a
matter of the greatest astonishment; yet it is received as divine by
some who dwell in enlightened New England, and even by those who have
sustained the character of devoted Christians. Learning recently that
Mormonism had found its way into a church in Massachusetts, and has
impregnated some with its gross delusions, so that excommunication has
been necessary, I am determined to delay no longer in doing what I can
to strip the mask from this mother of sin, and to lay open this pit of
abominations. \
\
\"Solomon Spaulding, to whom I was united in marriage in early life, was
a graduate of Dartmouth College, and was distinguished for a lively
imagination, and a great fondness for history. At the time of our
marriage he resided in Cherry Valley, New York. From this place we
removed to New Salem, Ashtabula county, Ohio, sometimes called Conneaut,
as it is situated on Conneaut Creek. Shortly after our removal to this
place, his health sunk, and he was laid aside from active labors. In the
town of New Salem there are numerous mounds and forts supposed by many
to be the dilapidated dwellings and fortifications of a race now
extinct. These ancient relics arrest the attention of the new settlers,
and become objects of research for the curious. Numerous implements were
found, and other articles evincing great skill in the arts. Mr.
Spaulding being an educated man, and passionately fond of history, took
a lively interest in these developments of antiquity; and in order to
beguile the hours of retirement and furnish employment for his lively
imagination, he conceived the idea of giving an historical sketch of
this long lost race. Their extreme antiquity led him to write in the
most ancient style, and as the Old Testament is the most ancient book in
the world, he imitated its style as nearly as possible. His sole object
in writing this imaginary history was to amuse himself and his
neighbors. This was about the year 1812. Hull\'s surrender at Detroit
occurred near the same time, and I recollect the date well from that
circumstance. As he progressed in his narrative the neighbors would come
in from time to time to hear portions read, and a great interest in the
work was excited among them. It claimed to have been written by one of
the lost nation, and to have been recovered from the earth, and assumed
the title of \"Manuscript Found.\" The neighbors would often inquire how
Mr. Spaulding progressed in deciphering the manuscript; and when he had
sufficient portion prepared, he would inform them, and they would
assemble to hear it read. He was enabled, from his acquaintance with the
classics and ancient history, to introduce many singular names, which
were particularly noticed by the people, and could be easily recognized
by them. Mr. Solomon Spaulding had a brother, Mr. John Spaulding,
residing in the place at the time, who was perfectly familiar with the
work, and repeatedly heard the whole of it read. From New Salem we
removed to Pittsburgh, in Pennsylvania. Here Mr. Spaulding found a
friend and acquaintance, in the person of Mr. Patterson, an editor of a
newspaper. He exhibited his manuscript to Mr. Patterson, who was very
much pleased with it, and borrowed it for perusal. He retained it for a
long time, and informed Mr. Spaulding that if he would make out a title
page and preface, he would publish it, and it might be a source of
profit. This Mr. Spaulding refused to do. Sidney Rigdon, who has figured
so largely in the history of the Mormons, was at that time connected
with the printing office of Mr. Patterson, as is well known in that
region, and as Rigdon himself has frequently stated, became acquainted
with Mr. Spaulding\'s manuscript, and copied it. It was a matter of
notoriety and interest to all connected with the printing establishment.
At length the manuscript was returned to its author, and soon after we
removed to Amity, Washington county, etc., where Mr. Spaulding deceased
in 1816. The manuscript then fell into my hands, and was carefully
preserved. It has frequently been examined by my daughter, Mrs.
M\'Kenstry, of Monson, Mass., with whom I now reside, and by other
friends. \
\
\"After the Book of Mormon came out, a copy of it was taken to New
Salem, the place of Mr. Spaulding\'s former residence, and the very
place where the \"Manuscript Found\" was written. A woman preacher
appointed a meeting there; and in the meeting read and repeated copious
extracts from the Book of Mormon. The historical part was immediately
recognized by all the older inhabitants, as the identical work of Mr.
Spaulding, in which they had all been so deeply interested years before.
Mr. John Spaulding was present and recognized perfectly the work of his
brother. He was amazed and afflicted that it should have been perverted
to so wicked a purpose. His grief found vent in a flood of tears, and he
arose on the spot, and expressed to the meeting his sorrow and regret
that the writings of his deceased brother should be used for a purpose
so vile and shocking. The excitement in New Salem became so great that
the inhabitants had a meeting and deputed Dr. Philastus Hurlburt, one of
their number, to repair to this place and to obtain from me the original
manuscript of Mr. Spaulding, for the purpose of comparing it with the
Mormon Bible, to satisfy their own minds, and to prevent their friends
from embracing an error so delusive. This was in the year 1834. Dr.
Hurlburt brought with him an introduction and request for the
manuscript, which was signed by Messrs. Henry Lake, Aaron Wright, and
others, with all of whom I was acquainted, as they were my neighbors
when I resided at New Salem. I am sure that nothing would grieve my
husband more, were he living, than the use which has been made of his
work. The air of antiquity which was thrown about the composition,
doubtless suggested the idea of converting it to the purposes of
delusion. Thus an historical romance, with the addition of a few pious
expressions, and extracts from the sacred Scriptures, has been construed
into a new Bible, and palmed off upon a company of poor deluded fanatics
as Divine. I have given the previous brief narration, that this work of
deep deception and wickedness may be searched to the foundation and the
authors exposed to the contempt and execration they so justly deserve.\
        (Signed)       \"MATILDA DAVISON.\"

This public affidavit went viral throughout local newspapers where
Mormons were present. The Spalding theory had legs, but this letter lit
a fire under its ass and really got the whole thing running. Of course,
the Mormon leadership couldn't sit idly by and let this blow up without
some kind of answer. If true, the Spalding theory would cripple any
credibility Jo and Rigdon had, and rightfully people would leave the
church in droves.

Just to quickly reiterate. This was the last thing the Mormons needed.
The leadership were fugitives of Ohio and now Missouri and the Mormons
were only just beginning the arduous reconstruction process needed to
turn Commerce Illinois into Nauvoo, their new homestead. A resurgence in
the Spalding theory was just one more thing the leadership didn't need
to deal with right now among everything else that was stressing them out
and stretching their resources to the absolute maximum.

Rigdon, wrote a scathing response published 9 days later. When I read
through it I can't help but think he maybe should have put more thought
into it, maybe slept on the letter a few nights to let it brew before
sending it out. But, I don't think Rigdon was always that calculated,
especially as his health still wasn't great from his confinement in
Liberty and the trials he'd been suffering ever since. The refutation
began with condemning the paper for publishing such dribble, and
personally attacking Matilda Davison for publishing such lies and
running in league with the basest of liars like Doctor Phil.

After Mormonism Unvailed was published in 1834, Mormon persecution began
to really ramp up, but it was a two-way street. As with any
institutionalized falsehood, there were people on the outside of
Mormonism looking in and questioning its validity who published stuff
like this in response to what they found. From the time of 1834 to when
Rigdon's response was published in 1839, a lot happened when it comes to
so-called Mormon persecution. The saints had built their temple in
Kirtland, accusations of the prophet's infidelity became more frequent,
they had established the KSS company and crashed their own local
economy, the leadership had been excommunicated from the Kirtland church
and were forced to flee to Missouri and then the entire Missouri-Mormon
war had blown up and everything was scorched in the aftermath. Some of
the most trusted leaders in the church had betrayed Jo and were
excommunicated and chased from their homes in response, chaos and
pandemonium were the only constants ruling Mormonism.

Just as the Mormons were trying to get settled down from everything
they'd dealt with in Missouri, this public exchange happened. Did Rigdon
actually refute the claims made by Davison and the Spalding theory at
large? Let's read his refutation and boil down it down to see if we
can't analyze it with a skeptical eye.... Skepticize it, if you will....

 \"Commerce, May 27, 1839.\
\"Messrs. Bartlett and Sullivan:\-- In your paper of the 18th instant, I
see a letter signed by somebody calling herself Matilda Davison,
pretending to give the origin of Mormonism, as she is pleased to call
it, by relating a moonshine story about a certain Solomon Spaulding,

a creature with the knowledge of whose earthly existence I am entirely
indebted to this production; for, surely, until Dr. Philastus Hurlburt
informed me that such a being lived, at some former period, I had not
the most distant knowledge of his existence;

and all I know about his character is the opinion I form from what is
attributed to his wife in obtruding my name upon the public in the
manner in which she is said to have done, by trying to make the public
believe that I had knowledge of the ignorant, and, according to her own
testimony, the lying scribblings of her deceased husband; for if her
testimony is to be credited, her pious husband, in his lifetime, wrote a
bundle of lies for the righteous purpose of getting money. How many lies
he had told for the same purpose, while he was preaching, she has not so
kindly informed us; but we are at liberty to draw our own conclusions,
for he that would write lies to get money, would also preach lies for
the same object.

This being the only information which I have, or ever had, of the said
Rev. Solomon Spaulding, I, of necessity, have but a very light opinion
of him as a gentleman, a scholar, or a man of piety, for had he been
either, he certainly would have taught his pious wife not to lie, nor
unite herself with adulterers, liars, and the basest of mankind. \
\
\"It is only necessary to say, in relation to the whole story about
Spaulding\'s writings being in the hands of Mr. Patterson, who was in
Pittsburg, and who is said to have kept a printing office, and my saying
that I was concerned in the said office, etc., is the most base of lies,
without even a shadow of truth.

There was no man by the name of Patterson, during my residence at
Pittsburg, who had a printing office; what might have been before I
lived there I know not. Mr. Robert Patterson, I was told, had owned a
printing office before I lived in that city, but had been unfortunate in
business, and failed before my residence there. This Mr. Patterson, who
was a Presbyterian preacher, I had a very slight acquaintance with
during my residence in Pittsburg. He was then acting under an agency, in
the book and stationery business, and was the owner of no property of
any kind, printing office or anything else, during the time I resided in
the city. 

"I see a letter signed by somebody calling herself Matilda Davison,
pretending to give the origin of Mormonism, as she is pleased to call
it"

This is textbook attacking credibility, both of the paper who published
Davison's statement, as well as Davison herself. This is a common
tactic, especially in law, if you can successfully discredit a witness'
credibility it renders their claims moot. Rigdon didn't establish why
she or the paper weren't credible, he just helplessly thrashed against
both in his very opening sentence.

"relating a moonshine story about a certain Solomon Spalding"

Rigdon paints the entire thing as an absurdity by calling it a moonshine
story. This attack is unprovoked and represents a "personal incredulity
logical fallacy". He claims it's absurd by calling it an absurd story,
but doesn't establish why it's absurd.

"a creature with the knowledge of whose earthly existence I am entirely
indebted to this production; for, surely, until Dr. Philastus Hurlburt
informed me that such a being lived, at some former period, I had not
the most distant knowledge of his existence;"

This is a thinly veiled form of denial known as distancing. It's an
impossible thing to do, but if Rigdon could prove that he never knew of
Spalding or had never even heard the name until Hurlbut brought it to
his attention, it would definitely punch a gaping hole in the theory.
The problem is, Spalding wasn't alive to validate or refute this claim.
If he were alive at the time, somebody could just go ask him if he ever
knew Rigdon, but Spalding died 23 years prior to this, making it a bit
of a challenge to prove or falsify Rigdon's claim that he'd never known
Spalding.

"according to her own testimony, the lying scribblings of her deceased
husband; for if her testimony is to be credited, her pious husband, in
his lifetime, wrote a bundle of lies for the righteous purpose of
getting money. How many lies he had told for the same purpose, while he
was preaching, she has not so kindly informed us; but we are at liberty
to draw our own conclusions, for he that would write lies to get money,
would also preach lies for the same object."

This isn't a formal logical fallacy that I could find, but it gets to
the heart of a sinister kind of discrediting where a person asserts that
somebody's claims are made purely for the financial gain. Rigdon asserts
that Spalding wrote lies for the purpose of getting money, but that
misses the point and it's a red herring to the main point. Davison
stated explicitly that Spalding was an imaginative person who needed a
creative outlet in his retirement and thus took to writing fiction.
People write fictional books to sell all the time and claiming that it
somehow makes them a liar is a pure ad hominem attack and doesn't lend
any credibility to Rigdon's entire refutation.

"This being the only information which I have, or ever had, of the said
Rev. Solomon Spaulding, I, of necessity, have but a very light opinion
of him as a gentleman, a scholar, or a man of piety, for had he been
either, he certainly would have taught his pious wife not to lie, nor
unite herself with adulterers, liars, and the basest of mankind."

Putting aside the blatant misogyny of Rigdon basically saying that
Spalding should have kept a tighter leash on his wife, Rigdon again
distances himself and ad hominem attacks Matilda and Solomon with this
statement. We still have yet to find a single solid refutation which
can't be boiled down to some form of logical fallacy.

"\"It is only necessary to say, in relation to the whole story about
Spaulding\'s writings being in the hands of Mr. Patterson, who was in
Pittsburg, and who is said to have kept a printing office, and my saying
that I was concerned in the said office, etc., is the most base of lies,
without even a shadow of truth."

This is blatant denial. Denial doesn't imply lying nor that the opposite
is inherently true; denial is something special in and of itself. There
are a few types of denial and they cause all sorts of different public
perceptions when the denial is made. When a person denies something, it
can be done knowing full well that it's not true, making it an active
lie, or they can deny something out of ignorance or stubbornness. If
someone is denying a death in the family, an addiction or something like
an affair, they aren't doing so as an active lie, they're just in a
mental state where the truth as other people see it doesn't seem to
affect them. There's another kind of denial where it's knowingly done in
blatant contradiction to truth, which is a lie. Then there are denials
which are true. If a false accusation is made, sometimes denial is the
only possible answer and the person is denying something to exonerate
themselves.

On the flipside of a public denial is how the public perceives the
denial. What seems to happen, and this is just what I've seen so I could
be wrong, but it seems as if denials tend to polarize the public for or
against the person issuing the denial. Let's examine Rigdon's denial
here to lay out what I mean. When he publicly denied this, it's likely
that the people who considered the Spalding theory true at the time just
said to themselves, of course they would deny it because it conflicts
with their narrative. People who considered the Spalding theory false,
most of which were probably faithful Mormons, probably said, of course
they would deny it because it's not true. The denial doesn't actually
get us any closer or further away from the truth, it's just the only
response we would expect.

I guess it really boils down to a question. Was this denial true? Only
two conclusions exist. Either Rigdon's denial is true and the entire
Spalding theory is bunk, or his denial was a blatant lie, making the
Spalding theory true.

Let's examine the last few claims Rigdon made as a bloc because he seems
to contradict himself here. Before reading it, we need to understand
that the Spalding theory hinges on Spalding's manuscript being left at
the Patterson Printing Press before it was dissolved in 1823. If
Spalding's manuscript wasn't at Patterson's printing press or Rigdon
truly had no association with the press/bookstore, then there's no
direct way for the manuscript to have fallen into Rigdon's hands and the
whole theory becomes a bit less tenable.

"There was no man by the name of Patterson, during my residence at
Pittsburg, who had a printing office; what might have been before I
lived there I know not. Mr. Robert Patterson, I was told, had owned a
printing office before I lived in that city, but had been unfortunate in
business, and failed before my residence there. This Mr. Patterson, who
was a Presbyterian preacher, I had a very slight acquaintance with
during my residence in Pittsburg. He was then acting under an agency, in
the book and stationery business, and was the owner of no property of
any kind, printing office or anything else, during the time I resided in
the city. "

What does this mean? Rigdon began by saying that he never knew any
Robert Patterson to have owned a printing press during his time in
Pittsburgh. Then he goes on to claim that he had a passing acquaintance
with Robert Patterson, but that he wasn't even in the printing business
during the time Rigdon resided in Pittsburgh. This is a bold-faced lie.
Rigdon was likely friends with Silas Engles, the printer for the
Patterson print shop and we have Rigdon's name on an unclaimed letter
list from the Pittsburgh post office from 1816 right before Spalding's
death. It wasn't until 1825 that Rigdon moved from Pennsylvania to Ohio,
during which time Patterson purchased and ran the Pittsburgh printing
press into the ground. Rigdon was living near Pittsburgh the entire time
the Patterson printing press/bookstore was running and the Pittsburgh
postmaster's daughter, who was working full-time in the post office,
said she saw Rigdon and Silas Engles together in the post office more
than once. Are we to truly believe that Rigdon, a lover of printed
material, had no knowledge of or connection to the Patterson printing
press/bookstore the entire time he was there, even though he was friends
with an employee of the store?

That question even ignores the fact that Rigdon worked as a tanner for
many of those years. One of the primary uses for tanned hides back then
was for book covers, meaning the Patterson Printing press was likely one
of Rigdon's main clients.

All of this to say, the public perception of this public exchange was
what was most important. We don't have any numbers on how this whole
public debacle affected membership in the church. We don't know if this
caused a bunch of people to question and then subsequently leave the
church due to the unanswerable questions raised with this new resurgence
of the Spalding theory. The actual membership numbers we have were
largely recounted by the Mormon leadership or as a random number some
random people included in their journal about the Saints being 10 or 15
thousand strong, hardly a scientific heuristic. Granted, it may have
been hard to track exactly how many people were following Jo, Rigdon and
the quorum of the twelve from Kirtland to Missouri in the first place,
and then trying to figure out what percentage of those people stuck with
the church through the exodus to Illinois is another challenge in and of
itself. Some Mormons living in Missouri renounced their membership and
remained in Missouri instead of following the rest of the Saints out to
Quincy, Illinois. Then, if we add all the pressures that caused Mormons
to disaffect in the aftermath of the Missouri-Mormon war, the average,
what we might call chapel Mormon today just attending and paying their
tithes faithfully, having all this pressure comes to see Matilda Davison
publish this claim that the whole damn Book of Mormon was taken off some
dead guy back in Pittsburgh and the leadership doesn't have an answer
beyond denial and ad hominem attacks, this must have caused at least
somebody to question just what the hell was going on here.

And let's just run on that for a minute, how could we know the impact
this public controversy had on the believing Mormon population. The
Mormons in Missouri had been recounted as 8-10 thousand by Mormon
accounts, but there wasn't a Missouri census performed in that brief
window of March to December of 1838, and many Mormons didn't have actual
homesteads from which to conduct a census even if it were performed. The
truth of the matter is, trying to estimate Mormon population at any
given time was a bit of a challenge throughout all of its history. I'll
read a quick excerpt from an article titled "How large was the
population of Nauvoo" by Susan Easton Black published through BYU
studies volume 35 Issue 2. In just a few short paragraphs she gets to
the problems with population estimates and how hard it is to really nail
down for sure. Follow the show notes for a link to the article.

"various estimates have been given by many historians for the population
of nauvoo from 1839 to 1846. admittedly demographic descriptions of that
era are riddled with statistical inadequacies yet while these
difficulties have been recognized by historians they have not been
resolved to the extent possible through research.

while historians all agree that the population of nauvoo rapidly
increased between 1839 and 1846 they either describe this growth with
undocumented figures avoid mentioning any concrete figures, or cast
doubt on the figures they have cited. for example robert flanders simply
states the population of illinois trebled during each decade between
1820 1840 and doubled between 1840 and 1850. when describing the LDS
population he quotes others the mormons reported a population of ten
thousand by late 1842; thomas ford in his history of illinois wrote that
there were by the end of the year sixteen thousand mormons altogether in
hancock. on another occasion he quotes from an october 1843 issue of the
nauvoo neighbor in which nauvoo is designated the great emporium of the
west, the center of all centers... a population of 15000 souls
congregated from the four quarters of the globe.

two other historians david miller and Della miller accurately assert
that when the mormons first arrived there in the spring of 1839
approximately 100 persons occupied the whole peninsula. by 1845 the
official illinois census showed that the city had grown to nearly 12000
but they offer the caveat that most contemporary accounts both mormon
and non mormon regularly overestimated the population, sometimes
stretching the figure up to more than 20000. the millers mistakenly cite
the january 7 1846 issue of the warsaw signal which they interpret as
saying that the population of nauvoo was 22599 the signal was actually
reporting on all of hancock county.

church historian B H roberts left room for a range of population sizes:
early in 1843 Nauvoos population was variously computed from twelve to
sixteen thousand. later he concludes when the exodus of the saints was
enforced nauvoo had a population variously estimated from twelve to
twenty thousand. roberts overestimation is even further exceeded by the
illinois department of conservation which announced that nauvoo was
illinois largest city with a population of 27000 in 1844.

As Nauvoos era is recalled by historians one is left wondering if more
precise and informative statistics about Nauvoos population from 1839 to
1846 can be found. since numbers range from 12000 to 27000, a need for
greater accuracy is evident."

All of that said, how could any historian or group of historians
actually figure out what the real numbers are, and as an extension
question, and why I read that excerpt in the first place, how could we
truly know the impact of the Spalding theory surfacing again in this
public exchange?

The way I see it, Rigdon's denial could be taken two ways and means one
of two mutually exclusive things. The believers and non-believers
probably fell down on either side of the issue with a few who questioned
making their opinion apparent by abandoning the church; an impact which
we have no way of gauging. I doubt anybody was convinced the BoM was
true who otherwise weren't when they read this letter exchange in the
local newspaper, but that impact probably cut the other way. But his
denial can only mean one of the following two things. Either, Rigdon's
denial was true and the Spalding theory is bunk, or his denial was
bold-faced lying and the Spalding theory is true. There is no other
interpretation of the facts and I don't think that's a false dichotomy
fallacy. I simply ask you to skepticize that dichotomy for yourself and
ask which makes the most sense.

But sense making wasn't always Rigdon's strong suit as he was known to
be rather verbose in his delivery. If there truly was nothing to the
Spalding theory and Rigdon were a rational human being capable of
refuting these accusations without devolving into a cesspool of
name-calling and logical fallacies, what might that open exchange look
like? Please allow some brief artistic liberty as I try to channel my
inner-Rigdon here with what I think would have been a better refutation.

 \"Commerce, May 27, 1839.\
\"Messrs. Bartlett and Sullivan:\-- In your paper of the 18th instant, I
see a letter signed by Matilda Davison, pretending to give the origin of
Mormonism, as she is pleased to call it, by making accusations about a
certain Solomon Spaulding, a man with whom I only ever had passing
acquaintance; for, surely, Dr. Philastus Hurlburt informed me that the
man had written by his own hand, at some former period, a history of the
former inhabitants of this continent; I had not the most distant
knowledge of its existence; and all I know about Mr. Spalding's
character is the opinion I form from what is attributed to his wife in
obtruding my name upon the public in the manner in which she is said to
have done, by trying to make the public believe that I had taken his
history and made scripture of it, and, according to her own testimony,
the imaginative scribblings of her deceased husband are now our Book of
Mormon; for if her testimony is to be credited, her pious husband, in
his lifetime, wrote a bundle of fictions for the purpose of getting
money. How many stories he had told for the same purpose, while he was
preaching, she has not so kindly informed us; but we are at liberty to
draw our own conclusions, for he that would write stories to get money,
would make a good fiction author which has no place in writing in the
name of the Almighty. This being the only information which I have, or
ever had, of the said Rev. Solomon Spaulding, I, of necessity, have but
a very kind opinion of him as a gentleman, a scholar, and a man of
piety, for he had many friends and few known enemies in this world, but
wasted his time on fictitious pursuits for the purpose of getting
money.\
\"It is only necessary to say, in relation to the whole story about
Spaulding\'s writings being in the hands of Mr. Patterson, who was in
Pittsburg, and who is said to have kept a printing office, and my saying
that I was concerned in the said office, etc., is a false accusation.
There was a man by the name of Patterson, during my residence at
Pittsburg, who had a printing office; what business Mr. Patterson and
Mr. Spalding conducted before I lived there I know not. Mr. Robert
Patterson, had owned a printing office while I lived in that city, but
had been unfortunate in business, and failed, and was, therefore,
dissolved and sold to one who may make a better run of the business of
printing in Pittsburgh. This Mr. Patterson, I am informed, was awaiting
Mr. Spalding's title page of the fiction to be published. He was then
purchasing hides from the work of my hands, in the book and stationery
business, and published a great deal many books while we conducted
business together.

Now I feel it time to share a bit on the real story of how our golden
bible, as many call it, as it is the divine work of the Almighty sent to
deliver us from bonds of iniquity in our last days, for Zion shall be
established to receive our savior when his time is come to set at
defiance our laws and our religion; for our Book of Mormon brings all
those who read it closer to their savior and promises everlasting life
in the great realm that awaits those who seek to obey his will. The
prophet, for none other word can scarcely describe the righteousness and
persecution this man has had to endure, did see the face of our Lord God
with Jesus Christ at his right hand, and they did wish that he would not
join any religion as their creeds are abomination and their professors
corrupt, and it was this divine calling of a young and unlearned man by
which our Lord moves his will upon us to bring us closer to the savior,
and soon it was by the power of god, and not man, that this unlearned
man delivered our Book of Mormon to be the salvation to this generation
of gentiles, and all those who feel the quickening of the spirit upon
reading its pages. And it was by this mechanism that the Lord gave us
the Book of Mormon and there can be no natural explanation as it was a
book delivered to us in the same manner the commandments were delivered
to Moses on Mount Sinai, as the Lord speaks to his modern-day prophets
the way he spake unto the prophets of old. As the prophets of old were
directed by revelation from the Lord, so too are we directed by his will
and power through revelation to build up the New Jerusalem unto this
generation and our progenitors for generations to come.

There we go. A non-combative refutation to the Spalding theory which
doesn't rely on myriad logical fallacies and sticks with the story as
the church claims it today. We've gone over the Spalding theory in the
past, and I try to make no bones about the fact that the vast majority
of credible historians and scholars consider it bunk, but I reserve a
small credulous part in the back of my mind where the Spalding theory
lives. Needless to say, seeing Rigdon's blatant denial which relies
heavily on ad hominem attacks and bold-faced lying definitely makes that
small credulous part scream in excitement that there might just be
something to this theory.

C Segment:

That does it for the historical portion for today. For the rest of
today's episode, I planned on airing a conversation I had with Professor
CJ of the Dangerous History podcast, but in light of last week's episode
that conversation is going to be tabled until next week. If you want to
know who I'm talking to for next week's show, be sure to check out the
Dangerous History podcast as a primer to our conversation. Instead, I
want to answer some feedback I received from last week's interview
exchange with Charone Frankel of the Habeas Humor podcast.

I'm actually going to talk a little about a topic we covered in the
patron only version of the conversation. Feel free to listen to that
version if you're a patron and if you're not a patron and think the show
is worth it, consider tossing us a buck or two an episode, less than a
cup of coffee per month on patreon.com/nakedmormonism to hear all the
extended episodes. To get everybody up to speed, Charone and I talked a
bit about religious exemptions in the law and whether or not they were a
good thing. To be clear, Charone claimed that all religious exemptions
should be removed as they create a religious class who have certain
privileges that non-religious people don't enjoy, an inherently unfair
and biased system. While I didn't actually disagree with her, I went on
a screed about how some religious exemptions may be rational when it
comes to things like the Native American Church using peyote, but I
applied the situation to a hypothetical Mormonism which gets to the
hallucinogenic roots of Mormonism. Of course, because I'm not talking on
the fly and able to listen back to our conversation and think things
through a bit, I'm able to be a bit more calculated in my words and
logic, but Charone essentially asked if I thought religious exemptions
should be allowed, a question I didn't actually answer at all, we just
kinda rabbit trailed until the conversation was essentially over and she
was plugging her show. We didn't have any disagreement, but we didn't
come to an agreement.

It's hard to figure out why I never directly answered the question. I
think mostly because we were kind of having two different conversations.
What I mean by that is, she was talking about eradicating religious
exemptions, an issue I'll talk through in a minute, while I was talking
more about removing laws which I perceive to be unfair. A subsect of
laws I consider unfair are certain drug use laws. The initial religious
exemption which allowed the Native American Church to legally carry and
use peyote is a just exemption in my opinion. My justification for that
is the Natives were using peyote here for thousands of years before
Europeans colonized and said that using it was illegal, I don't think
it's fair to legislate against the practices of the Native Americans
when us Europeans are the immigrants living on their land who made the
laws against peyote in the first place.

The point Charone was making apropos of our discussion about cults and
the FLDS is that once somebody cries religion they suddenly don't have
to follow all kinds of labor laws and child protection laws which they
otherwise would be prosecuted for if they weren't a religion. I totally
agree with her point in that. I mean, seaorg, the worker bees of
Scientology get paid something like 60 cents an hour for their work and
scientology is never prosecuted for these heinous violations of labor
laws. By extension, the LDS church doesn't pay the majority of their
sales force or the people who staff their visitor's centers because
those people are on missions, they're paying the church to be able to
work for them. Beyond that the church has a separate box on the tithing
slip where you can donate to the missionary fund specifically, which is
then absorbed into the towering entity that is the LDS church and they
appropriate the funds as they see fit. These religious exemptions are
abused by everything from multi-billion dollar corporations masquerading
as churches, down to the lowliest cult leader who files for 501c3 tax
exemption status all around the world and it's simply not right.

But the issue goes quite a bit deeper than that, and follow me down this
rabbit-hole for a minute because I'll bring it back around to my
conversation with Charone in a second. Take the seemingly perpetual
fight the FFRF is waging against the IRS for religious exemptions in
501c3 tax status organizations. This is merely my cursory understanding
of the situation, so I'll probably get some details wrong, but the
overall point stands. The Freedom From Religion Foundation sued the IRS
back in 2014 because certain religions were enjoying non-profit filing
allowances which the FFRF didn't enjoy. If I understand correctly,
non-religious non-profits have to file stricter finances with the IRS
than religious non-profits, which the FFRF complained caused undue
burden on them and causes preferential treatment to religious
organizations strictly because they are religious. I wear a leather
wristband from BeSecular with the first amendment on it for a reason.
The FFRF also looped in the fact that "Pulpit Freedom Sunday," where
religions film themselves giving political speeches from the pulpit and
send it to the IRS daring them to prosecute, was some form of religious
exemption because other non-profits like the FFRF lose their tax-exempt
status when they politic from the pulpit.

These all represent religious exemptions which I consider egregious
violations of fair treatment of all citizens regardless of religion,
creed, culture, or ethnicity, which flies in the face of the
constitution. I think anybody looking at this situation can agree that
religions are being treated with undue allowances that their
non-religious counterparts don't enjoy, and that's a problem. I didn't
articulate that point in my conversation with Charone, and as I look
back on it, it seems like a foregone conclusion and a point not worth
belaboring.

Where the conversation evolved after that is where I think some nuance
exists and it came in the form of me asking Charone what religions
should be classified as if we remove all religious exemptions. The fact
of the matter is, religions aren't going anywhere any time soon. As much
as firebrand atheists wish we could live in a world without religion, it
seems at least a few centuries if not millennia away if the trends
continue to follow the same path they've followed since we've had
writing and religion. Don't get me wrong, I dream of the day when
non-religious people out populate the religious, but that doesn't seem
like a reality for the foreseeable future and I like to live in reality
and deal with it rationally. Just as Utah laws are inextricably tied to
the religion of the people who make and enforce the laws, the same trend
follows for American laws and Christianity in general. There's no easy
way to separate government and religion retroactively, we can only
safeguard against further grievances of that nature. Hypotheticals of
what our government would look like without any ties to religion are so
far away from reality that I don't have much use for wasting the
intellectual resources on dreaming up what that might look like. That's
why I was asking Charone her opinion of how religions should be
classified if there aren't any laws allowing them special privileges.

Lemme back up and walk you through why that seems like a relevant
question to me. Look, you get a big enough group of people together with
similar ideas, it's not long before somebody calls them a religion. One
of the paramount arguments between atheists and theists is whether or
not atheism is a religion, it's not, but that's still a common argument.
In the past I've attended a philosophy meetup here in Seattle which
meets every Friday night at a bar in Capitol Hill. They have their
weekly gathering where they come together and share ideas and
information for the purpose of expanding knowledge and fraternizing in
general. Pump a few hundred people into that group and change the
meeting day from Friday to Sunday and this philosophy group really
begins to look like a religion. Get a few firebrand determinists in
there and the philosophy group down the road has a few firebrand
proponents of free-will and you have competing cultures of philosophy
right next door to each other and things may start to look like a
modern-day Palestine; with the exception that most people inclined in
philosophy are also humanists and I don't see humanists bombing each
other in any possibly hypothetical, but the analogy still holds.

Why do we do this? Why do we gather together into groups of like-minded
individuals? Simple, for better or worse we're a group-think social
species. I've said on the podcast before that I credit the church with
providing structure and community to my upbringing which I otherwise
would have missed had I not grown up Mormon; such is the case with any
culture. I don't agree with all the baggage and useless horseshit the
church heaps on the shoulders of their parishioners, but there can be no
doubt that it provides some social good, or fills some kind of cultural
gap. That's the reason religion isn't going anywhere anytime soon, and
why so many people are willing to live with cognitive dissonance about
their beliefs because they reap the social benefits. I've received in a
small handful of emails from listeners who say they wish they could
leave the church but if they did it would be the end of important
relationships or their job so they grin and bear all the stupid shit
like misogyny and homophobia.

My point is, and why I went down this rabbit hole in the first place,
religions are fundamentally different from other entities. Groups of
people meeting together deserve non-profit benefits and exemptions that
for-profit groups shouldn't have. Let's face it, no philosophy group or
religion is actually turning out any tangible product or service, their
benefits are much harder to quantify. The IRS understands this
fundamental difference in entity structuring which is why they created
the 501c tax exemptions status code.

These are the entities included in the 501c3 tax code, but the
exemptions go to much broader definitions all through 501c1-29 and also
in the 501d-n subclauses. This is specifically 501c3, taken from the 501
wikipedia page, take that for what it's worth.

"Religious, Educational, Charitable, Scientific, Literary, Testing for
Public Safety, to Foster National or International Amateur Sports
Competition, or Prevention of Cruelty to Children or Animals
Organizations"

An hypothetical philosophy meetup group with a few hundred people
needing tax exempt status doesn't necessarily fall into any of those
categories, unless you try to loop in into an educational or scientific
non-profit, but I don't know if a bunch of 20-30 somethings getting
together and drinking beer actually fulfills the needed criteria. This
is a specific religious exemption in the tax code which may not apply to
other similar groups, but if a group is able to classify itself as a
religion, they get the exemptions. How would the people involved in that
philosophy group feel about being considered a religion because they
don't fit better into any of the other 501c3 categories? I bet there
might be some arguments flying around about what truly makes a religion
a religion, but it doesn't fit that important requirement to be
considered a religion which is the higher power part of the equation.

The point I'm making is that gathering together as a group has an
incredible amount of social benefit, and maybe it's time to reconsider
the definition of religion to include any group of people that gather on
a scheduled basis to fraternize and share ideas. The entire etymology of
religion doesn't need to be tainted by the theological aspect as
language is fluid and definitions change to meet our needs.

I guess that's my conclusion. Religions aren't going anywhere anytime
soon, theologies are. Let's appropriate the term religion or use a
better word that describes any group of people who meet together with
each other for all the benefits that community inspires.
