---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 53 – Bloody&#x27;s Play While Jo’s Away'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-53-bloodys-play-jos-away/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-53-bloodys-play-while-jos-away
category: History
date: 2017-06-02 03:14:46 +0000
---

Ep 53 -- Bloody's Play While Jo's Away

On this episode, we shift focus from Quincy to Liberty Jail and back as
we follow Bloody Brigham Young stepping into the vacuum of leadership,
making a power play in Jo's absence. Jo agrees to buy the land deal
proposed by Isaac Galland sight unseen after he screeds to him about
Mormon doctrine. Then Jo and friends are charged again in a Grand Jury
with everything they'd already been charged, then proceed to escape
during a transfer to Boone County. Everybody plays their part in the
building up of Zion in their clean slate state, Illinois.

Links:

Please take a quick 30-second survey to help out the show!!!\
<https://survey.libsyn.com/nakedmormonismpodcast>

Letter to Isaac Galland\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#full-transcript>

Letter to Judge George Thompkins\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#full-transcript>

Letter to Emma Smith\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#full-transcript>

AOA Beyond the Trailer Park podcast\
<https://www.spreaker.com/user/atheists/atheists-on-air-beyond-the-trailer-park-_42>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Welcome to episode 53 of the NMPC, the serial Mormon history podcast.
Today is Thursday June 1, 2017, my name is Bryce Blankenagel and thank
you for joining me.

<https://survey.libsyn.com/nakedmormonismpodcast>

We still have a lot to get to today, so let's get into a wrap-up of the
last historical episode for the milk today then we'll jump into the meat
of today's episode.

Last historical episode covered the letter exchanges going in and out of
Liberty Jail. Rigdon made his plea in the court for habeas corpus and
was essentially allowed to escape, which left Caleb Baldwin, Alexander
McRae, and Lyman Wight interred in the Liberty prison dungeon with the
prophet and his brother Hyrum. They were seemingly relieved to be
relieved of Rigdon's whining and maniacal spells of impending apocalypse
and untold persecution, but the remaining months ahead of them in that
dungeon wasn't a stroll on the beach.

Jo's power was threatened by his absence. The Saints were being chased
from Missouri, forced to flee from the mobocrat militias who were
enforcing the surrender negotiations agreed upon in November of 1838.
The Mormons were to be exterminated, or removed from Missouri; luckily
Illinois was nice enough to take the refugees. Jo was trying to run his
church, but it was in complete disarray regardless of his presence. His
internment didn't help with organization, it just caused power struggles
executive decisions to be made by people who were legitimate threats to
Jo's authority. Whether those people realized they were a threat isn't
clear, but Jo knew. He was afraid what Rigdon would do as soon as he got
to Quincy without Jo there to naysay him or keep him reigned in.

This was a rational fear. Hingepin Rigdon and Jo as business partners
had a sordid past, even as good friends. Go back to episodes 26-28 to
hear about the power struggles between them and see how they developed a
respect for each other in the wake of claiming each other had lost the
keys to prophecy. Power was a constant ebb and flow between Jo and
Rigdon, and Jo felt threatened with Rigdon in Quincy handling everything
in his absence. Unfortunately, Jo didn't realize that Rigdon wasn't
anywhere near as much a threat as some others who were handling business
in Illinois. The quorum of the twelve had assumed all leadership, and
they performed some executive actions which should have been handled by
vote, and the vote should have been called for by Jo and the presidency.
Instead, Bloody Brigham was handling the role of executive quite well,
merely whetting his palette for what the future held. We'll cover that
in a little more detail in a minute.

We read through a bunch of letters that were exchanged between various
church leaders and loved ones to those interred in Liberty Jail. We read
a letter Jo wrote to Presendia Huntington Buell as well as a later
letter written to his wife, Emma.

We finished up the episode talking about a guy named Isaac Galland, who
we'll discuss in a little more detail today, with a conclusion talking
about Rigdon's possible faith crisis during the entire Liberty jail
affair and everything which led up to and followed it.

That does it for the milk today, why don't we take a bite out of the
meat and see where it leads us down the never-ending labyrinth of rabbit
holes that is Mormon history.

Bloody Brigham was operating as president in Jo's absence. He didn't
have a problem making necessary executive decisions. We talked last
episode about how Edward Party-Boy Partridge said he didn't want to help
the Saints from Missouri, that he'd been able to get there by himself
and the saints should be able to do the same. Being the pragmatist he
was, Bloody Brigham was a little more charitable, setting him and
Party-boy Partridge at odds. Bloody Brigham was essentially the interim
supreme leader of the church, which is good because he was an awesome
businessman. Without Brigham's insights and influence, the church likely
would never have survived and the Mormons sure as hell never would have
made it to Utah.

Let me give you an example of Brigham's smart managerial ideas which
contributed to the survival of the Mormons. This example comes at the
end of the Nauvoo years after Jo's death in the Carthage gun fight and
it's something I learned from the local blacksmith when I was in Nauvoo
on the history tour.

When Bloody Brigham took over the church in Nauvoo and devised the plan
to go to the Rocky Mountains to build a safe-haven, he knew that it was
going to be a logistical nightmare getting over 10,000 people moved over
1200 miles to settle an area ruled by a chaotic mix of Native Americans,
mountain-men, and savage outlaws. Brigham devised an early assembly-line
kind of system to mass produce wagons and hand-carts. There were
multiple shops around Nauvoo that were dedicated to building just one
small portion of the wagon, like the box, wheels, suspensions systems,
stuff like that. They mass-produced those parts to specific measurements
and were able to manufacture thousands of wagons to get everybody across
the plains.

Creating this mass-production system was impressive in and of itself and
we can credit Bloody Brigham with having the foresight to implement it.
But beyond the mass production system was also a calculated shipping
system for each wagon. Each could carry 2,000 lbs of cargo. Brigham
implemented a system where each cart would carry 1,000 lbs of the
family's possessions, and 1,000 lbs of stuff the rest of the wagon train
needed, like bulk food, extra wagon parts, blacksmithing stuff to set up
once they got to Utah, all the necessities. They did this, and they
survived, showing just how brilliant of a businessman Brigham was. His
leadership got those people to Utah and established the Brighamite
Mormon church.

His strong business traits were being exercised in a healthy manner
during the Mormon settlement in Illinois. With Jo and Hyrum absent,
Brigham stepped up to the plate and handled some organization and
business items to keep the saints alive.

Rigdon was Bloody Brigham's only competitor. This time during the early
organization of the Illinois settlements was when Rigdon developed a
healthy new respect and fear of who Bloody Brigham was starting to
become. Bloody Brigham purged the leadership and put his own guy,
Wilford Woodruff, into the quorum, the same Woodruff who would become
the 4^th^ prophet of the Brighamite church. In addition, he kept a tight
set of reigns on the other members of the leadership, making sure that
Jo would be happy with his work upon his return. A guy named Jonathan
Dunham stepped out of line when he went to Springfield and held a
conference in opposition to Jo's wishes.

This is from volume 3 page 259 of the History of the Church Source and
text-critical edition by Dan Vogel.

"Sunday, \[March\] 17^th^. Extract from the minutes of a Conference of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, held in Quincy, on the
17^th^ of March, 1839, Brigham Young was unanimously called to the
chair, and Robert B. Thompson chosen clerk.

'Elder Young then arose and gave a statement of the circumstances of the
church at Far West and his feelings in regard to the scattering of the
brethren, believing it to be wisdom to unite together as much as
possible in extending the hand of charity for the relief of the poor,
who were suffering under the hand of persecution in Missouri; and to
pursue that course that would prove for the general good of the whole
church, who were suffering for the gospel's sake; and would advise the
saints to settle (if possible) in companies, or in a situation so as to
be organized into churches, that they might be nourished, and fed by the
shepherds; for without, the sheep would be scattered; and he also
impressed it upon the minds of the saints to give heed to the
revelations of God; especially the elders should be careful to depart
from all iniquity, and to remember the counsel given by those whom God
hath placed as counselors in his church; that they may become as wise
stewards in the vineyard of the Lord, that every man may know and act in
his own place, for there is order in the Kingdom of God, and we must
regard that order if we expect to be blessed.

Elder Young also stated that Elder Johnathan Dunham had received
previous instructions not to call any conferences in this State, or
elsewhere; but to go forth and preach repentance, which was his calling;
but contrary to those instructions, he called a conference in
Springfield, Ill., and presided there, and brought forth the business
which he had to transact; and his proceeding in many respects during the
conference was contrary to the feelings of Elder W. Woodruff and other
official members who were present. They considered his proceedings
contrary to the will and order of God.

The conference then voted that Elder J. Dunham be reproved for his
improper course---and that he be advised to adhere to the counsel given
him.

And after transacting various other business, Elder George W. Harris
made some remarks relative to those who had left us in the times of our
perils, persecutions, and dangers, and were acting against the interest
of the church, and that the church could no longer hold them in
fellowship unless they repented of their sins, and turned unto God.

After the conference fully expressed their feelings upon the subject, it
was unanimously voted that the following persons be excommunicated from
the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, vis.: George M. Hinkle,
Sampson Avard, John Corrill, Reed Peck, Wm. W. Phelps, Frederick G.
Williams, Thomas B. Marsh, Burr Riggs, and several others. After which,
the conference closed by prayer.

BRIGHAM YOUNG, Pres.

ROBERT B. THOMPSON, Clerk.'"

Alright, what did we just read? While Jo and friends were toiling with
trying to run the church from Liberty jail and Hingepin Rigdon was
getting settled on the little farm he was renting from Isaac Galland
near Commerce, Bloody Brigham was running the show and proceeded to
transact business, chastise people like Elder J. Dunham for his improper
course, which could mean any number of things during this fragile time
in the church's history, and, of course, Bloody Brigham took this
conference as an opportunity to excommunicate nearly every person who
testified against the leadership during the November court of inquiry.
Jo had no idea this happened until after he busted out of the joint.
Rigdon wasn't even present at this conference. Jo told them explicitly
to not hold any conferences until he could get there, which is an absurd
thing to say because of course they will need to hold a conference to
figure out just what the hell they're going to do with 10,000 refugees
moving into a dinky little swampland on the Illinois banks of the
Mississippi. Bloody Brigham took charge and handled business as it
needed to be handled.

At this same time, let's jump back to the prison cell. Jo had received
word that Isaac Galland, the guy who owned a ton of land in Illinois and
Iowa, had met with Israel Barlow and Hingepin Rigdon, and Jo told them
to go forward with the agreed upon terms. This is a couple of excerpts
from the letter Jo sent to Galland on March 22, 1839, 5 days after that
passage we read about Brigham cleansing the leadership and putting in
his boy Wilford Woodruff.

This is hosted on the Joseph Smith papers.org and there will be a link
to it in the show notes.

Mr. [Isaac Galland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#6353376623497910656);

Dear Sir:

I have just been privileged with a perusal of a letter, put into my
hands by Mr. [D\[avid\] W.
Rogers](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#5621130355262800903),
which letter was directed to him, dated February 26th, 1839. and
signed, [Isaac
Galland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#3236278458441226839).
The contents of said letter expresses a sympathy and a good feeling
towards the people and [church of the Latter Day
Saints](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#10003159210474193308),
which I have the high honor, of being their religious leader; I say high
honor, more especially, because I know them to be an honorable, a
virtuous, and an upright people. And that honor, virtue, and
righteousness is their only aim and object in this life. They are sir, a
much injured, and abused people; and are greatly belied as to their
true character. They have been fallen upon by a gang of ruffians and
murderers, three times, in the state
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#18255656042351685509);
and entirely broken up, without having committed the first offence:
or without there being the least shadow in the very slightest degree of
evidence, that they have done ought of any thing derogatory to the laws,
or character, of the state
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#3728168919604333876)...

I am bold to say sir, that a more nefarious transaction never has
existed, since the days of Yore; than that which has been practiced upon
us.--- Myself and those who are in prison with me, were torn from our
houses, with our wives and children clinging to our garments, under the
awful expectation of being exterminated...

We are kept under a strong guard, night and day, in a prison of
double walls and doors, proscribed in our liberty of conscience, our
food is scant, uniform, and coarse; we have not the privilege of cooking
for ourselves, we have been compelled to sleep on the floor with straw,
and not blankets sufficient to keep us warm; and when we have a fire, we
are obliged to have almost a constant smoke. The Judges have gravely
told us from time to time that they knew we were innocent, and ought to
be liberated, but they dare not administer the law unto us, for fear of
the mob. But if we will deny our religion, we can be liberated.
Our lawyers have gravely told us, that we are only held now by the
influence of long faced Baptists; how far this is true, we are not able
to say: but we are certain that our most vehement accusers, are the
highest toned professors of religion... But enough of this. I
feel highly gratified to learn of a man who had sympathy, and feelings
of friendship towards a suffering, and an injured, and an innocent
people: if you can do them any good, render them any assistance, or
protection, in the name of suffering humanity, we beseach you, for God's
sake, and humanity's sake, that you will do it. If you should
see [Gov. \[Robert\]
Lucas](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#13570149122796753568),
I wish you would have the kindness to state to him, the contents of this
letter; as we know him from information to be a man of character and a
gentleman. I would be glad therefore, if it were possible that he, and
not only him, but every other patriotic, and humane man, should know the
real facts of our sufferings: and of the unjust and cruel hand that is
upon us...

\[Then it goes through like 6 pages of a screed from Jo describing
everything about Mormon doctrine with bible references to back it up, a
side note here, Jo didn't use any passages from the BoM in this letter
to teach Galland about Mormon theology, just the bible. The reason he
was doing this was to win favor with Isaac Galland. Galland was a rich
dude with many powerful friends in the Illinois and Iowa governments. He
owned a ton of land. Jo wanted this guy to convert to Mormonism, and
thus gave him the whole 9 yards to try and convince him of its truth. I
won't belabor you with everything Jo said, I tuned most of it out while
reading through because it's just typical preacher dribble that Jo was
often wont to rant upon. This is the historically significant portion of
the letter and why we're reading it in the first place.\]

Please Sir, to pardon me for having obtruded thus lengthy upon your
feelings, as you are a stranger to me; and I know nothing of you, only
what I have read in you\[r\] letter, and from that I have taken the
liberty which I have. Be assured Sir, that I have the most liberal
sentiments, and feelings of charity towards all sects, parties, and
denominations; and the rights and liberties of concience, I hold most
sacred and dear, and dispise no man for differing with me in matters of
opinion.

Accept Dear Sir, my best wishes for your welfare, and desire for
further acquaintance, I close my letter, by giving you some quotations
which you will have the goodness to read.

Yours truly,

JOSEPH SMITH, Jr.

N. B. If [Bishop \[Edward\]
Partridge](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#11249100236579409305),
or if
the [church](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#1770787830462568157) have
not made a purchase of your land, and if there is not any one who feels
a particular interest in making the purchase, you will hold it in
reserve for us; we will purchase it of you at the proposals that you
made to [Mr. \[Israel\]
Barlow](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-isaac-galland-22-march-1839/2#6246228415914093679).
We think the church would be wise in making the contract, therefore, if
it is not made before we are liberated, we will make it.

Yours &c.

JOSEPH SMITH, Jr."

Actually, we were really just reading it for the N.B. thing, the post
script at the end of the letter. While Rigdon and Brigham were doing
their thing in Illinois to organize the church, Jo sent this letter to
Galland, basically accepting his business proposition sight unseen, thus
tentatively committing the church to about \$50k of debt. Jo read in a
letter that Galland owned all this land, and without talking to his
counselors or even seeing any of the property for himself, Jo gave the
church the go-ahead and told Galland that if the church didn't buy his
property by the time Jo was released from jail, then Jo personally would
see to it that the property was purchased.

One of two things happened with Galland. Either something in Jo's letter
spoke to him and he was converted sincerely, or he saw the Mormons as
suckers and decided to stick around to make sure they purchased his
land. Galland was likely ecstatic that these massive chunks of land he
owned were now being purchased in a bloc by the Mormons, and now it was
just a matter of making them flourish in the area and everybody's land
prices go up, including his own. That's what happened in Kirtland,
although the opposite happened in Missouri. Galland wanted his land in
Illinois to develop like Kirtland had when the Mormons began moving in,
he didn't want whatever happened in Missouri to happen to the Mormons
and their land again this time around in Illinois.

But, Jo wasn't done complaining to people in high places about the
situation. That letter was sent on March 22 from Liberty jail. A week
prior Jo had dictated a letter to the honorable Judge George Thompkins
asking for a legitimate hearing instead of that sham court of inquiry
which had happened to land them there in the first place. So, while Jo
was dictating the letter to Isaac Galland telling him that the Mormons
will happily buy his property, Judge Thompkins was in the middle of
reading what we're about to go over and making a decision about how to
handle the whole 'Mormon prisoners' situation.

Everybody in the Missouri justice system knew that the Mormons had been
shortchanged in the court of inquiry. The whole situation was such a
mess and there wasn't a whole lot of citable case law that gave them
justification for holding to the surrender terms and forcing the Mormons
to leave the state. The Mormons had no recourse for the people they'd
lost in the Haun's Mill massacre. Jo was rotting in Jail for treason and
murder, when some actors in the Missouri militia had done way worse shit
to the Mormons and were deserving of the same or worse punishment. But
nobody in the Missouri government could side with the Mormons because
they were a shrinking minority with increasingly fleeting numbers as
more and more of them moved to Illinois. No politician could help the
Mormons and hope to have a career in Missouri politics from then on.

The term comes back to mind, political plutonium. Anybody who touched or
even got near the Mormons one way or another was dead politically
speaking. Judge Thompkins received this letter from which we're going to
read a few excerpts. It's also hosted at the Joseph Smith papers.org.

"To the honorable Judge \[George\] Thompkins, or either of the Judges of
the Supreme Court for the State of
[Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#3738433194781735671).

Your petitioners, 

[Alansen \[Alanson\]
Ripley](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#2398859566638765165)\[,\]
[Heber C. Kimble
\[Kimball\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#14886117652541515441), [Joseph
B.
Noble](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#6794964188932478751),
William Huntington, and Joseph Smith Jr beg leave respectfully to
represent to your honor that Joseph Smith Jr is now in [Liberty
Jail](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#15487492644208655222),
Clay County (Mo) that he has been restrained of his liberty near five
months. Your petitioners claim that the whole transaction which has been
the cause of his confinement, is unlawful from the first to the last, he
was taken from his home by a fraud practiced upon him by a man named by
the name of [George M.
Hinkle](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#13115772865728041457) and
one or two others thereby your petitioner respectfully shows that he was
forced contrary to his wishes and without knowing the cause into the
Camp which was commanded by [General \[Samuel D.\]
Lucas](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#13903574564491861286) of [Jackson
County](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#16782465245788916743) and
from thence to [Ray
County](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#10108808585098840755) sleeping
on the ground and suffering many insults and injuries and deprivations
which were calculated in their nature to break down the spirits and
constitution of the most robust and hardy of mankind, he was put in
Chains immediately on his being landed
in [Richmond](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#9983091306722580029) and
there underwent a long and tedious expartie examination. Not only was it
expartie, but your petitioners solemnly declare that it was a mock
examination that there was not the least shadow of honor or justice or
law administered toward him, on account of his religion but sheer
prejudice and the spirit of persecution and malice and prepossession
against him on account of his religion--- that the whole examinations
show that the said Joseph Smith Jr was deprived of the privilege of
being examined before the court as the law directs--- that the witnesses
on the part of
the [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#15350488406504933518) were
taken by force of arms and threatened with extermination, immediate
death, and were brought without Subpoena or warrant under this awful and
glaring anticipation of being exterminated if they did not swear
something against him to please the Mob, or his persecutors, and
those witnesses were compelled to swear at the muzzle of the Gun and
that some of them have acknowledged since which your petitioners do
testify and are able to prove; that they did swear false and that they
did it in order to save their lives and your petitioners testify that
all the testimony that had any tendency or bearing of criminality
against Said Joseph Smith Jr is false.

We are personally acquainted with the circumstances and being with him
most of the time, and being present at the times spoken of by
them therefore we know that their testimony was false and if he could
have had a fair and impartial and lawful examination before the court,
and could have been allowed the privilege of introducing his witnesses,
he could have disproved every thing that was against him: but the Court
suffered them to be intimidated some of them \<in\> the presence of the
Court, and they were driven also and hunted and some of them entirely
driven out of
the [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#10970867330481849873),
And thus he was not able to have a fair trial; ...

And after the examination the said prisoner was committed to the jail
for treason against the State
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#10739235335692857924).
whereas the said Joseph Smith Jr did not levy war against the State
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#15941065624619466574),
neither did he commit any overt acts, neither did he aid or abet an
enemy against the State
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#15657277053533174947) during
the time that he is charged with having done so... and yet said prisoner
has been committed to [Liberty
Jail](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#13433636860669261011) Clay
County (Mo) for treason, he has continually offered bail to any
amount that could be required, notwithstanding your petitioners alledge
that he ought to have been acquitted.... And your petitioners alledge
that he has is not guilty of any crime whereby he should be restrained
of his liberty; ... and that he has never acted at any time only in his
own defence and that too on his own ground property and possessions That
the prisoner has never commanded any military company nor held any
military authority neither any other office real or pretended in the
State of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#13033908484402146820)
except that of a religious teacher. That he never has borne arms in the
military ranks, and in all such cases has acted as a private
character and as an individual, how then, your petitioners would ask can
it be possible the prisoner has committed treason.

\[Here we get into some incredible denials of historical facts. Jo talks
about Doctor Sampson Avard and George M. Hinkle being the leaders of the
Danites, claiming they intimidated Jo into silence so they could perform
their depredations in Daviess county. There are a lot of holes in Jo's
story here, but he had been locked up for 5 months and was willing to
say anything to Judge Thompkins to get an appearance.\]

The prisoner has had nothing to
in [Davies\[s\] County](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#4992100169408616985) only
on his own business as an individual. That the testimony
of [Dr \[Sampson\]
Avard](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#16676586372854546128) concerning
a council held at [James
Sloan](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#3820466813870237777)'s
was false. Your petitioners do solemnly declare that there was no such
council, that your petitioners were with the prisoner, and there was no
such vote nor conversation as [Doctor
Avard](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#12370538364665056108) swore
to, that [Doctor
Avard](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#2257887092976442970) also
swore falsely concerning a constitution as he said was introduced among
the Saints, that the prisoner had nothing to do with burning in [Davies
County](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#15058950305057664725).
that the prisoner made public proclamation against such things; that the
prisoner did oppose [Doctor
Avard](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#2231568746720473081) and [George,
M.
Hinkle](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#9791912596127077332) against
vile measures with the Mob, but was threatened by them if he did not let
them alone. that the prisoner did not have any thing to do with what is
called Bogart's Battle, for he knew nothing of it untill it was all
over, that he was at home, and in the bosom of his own family during the
time of that whole transaction. And in fine your petitioners alledge
that he is held in confinement without cause and under an unlawful and
tyrannical oppression; and that his health and constitution and
life depend on being liberated from his confinement...

And further your petitioners testify that the said Joseph Smith Jr did
make a public proclamation in [Far
West](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#16785365485376083040) in
favor of the militia of the State
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#1249801255905333267) and
of its laws and also of the Constitution of the [United
States](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#2122446645492870904).
That he has ever been a warm friend to his country and did use all his
influence for peace That he is a peaceable and quiet citizen and is not
worthy of death, of stripes, bonds or imprisonment. The above mentioned
speech was delivered on the day before the surrender at [Far
West](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#3770915060832404578).

[Alanson
Ripley](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#7369180558032990233)

[Heber C.
Kimball](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#6320439932145222406)

Wm Huntington

[Joseph B.
Noble](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/petition-to-george-thompkins-15-march-1839/1#12949232760464463823)

Joseph Smith Jr"

Kind of a long thing to read, but it was important because Jo made his
case for us in this very letter to exhibit that he's innocent and that
Sampson Avard and George Hinkle were responsible for everything that the
Mormons did unlawfully in Missouri. It wasn't the Mormon's leader, Jo,
who was responsible for what the Mormons did, it was all because of
these guys who had incidentally been excommunicated by Bloody Brigham by
the time Judge Thompkins was actually reading this letter.

It wasn't just Jo who filed this petition. What we read includes all
those guys I listed who signed it at the end, but attached in the same
package which was sent to Judge Thompkins were separate petitions from
Caleb Baldwin and Alexander McRae, they were forced to make their own
petitions to the judge.

After this plea was sent and Jo had told Isaac Galland that he wanted to
buy everything the guy had, Jo sat down to pen a letter to his wife,
Emma, once again from the Joseph Smith papers.org. Check the show notes.

"[Liberty,
Jail](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#6479300360624377296),
Clay. Co., Mo, April, 4th, 1839.

Dear--- and
affectionate--- [Wife](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#12778866215752307300).

Thursday night I sat down just as the sun is going down, as we peak
throu the greats of this lonesome prision, to write to you, that I may
make known to you my situation. It is I believe \<it is\> now about five
months and six days since I have bean under the grimace, of a guard
night and day, and within the walls grates and screeking of iron dors,
of a lonesome dark durty prison. With immotions known only to God, do I
write this letter, the contemplations, of the mind under these
circumstances, defies the pen, or tounge, or Angels, to discribe, or
paint, to the human mind being, who never experiance
what ~~I~~ we experience. This night we expect; is the last night we
shall try our weary joints and bones on our dirty straw couches in these
walls, let our case hereafter be as it may, as we expect to start
tomorrow, for [Davi\[es\]s
Co](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#3645403738661574413)---
for our trial, We shall have a change of Venue to some of the lower
counties, for the final trial, as our Lawyers generaly say, if law can
be adheared to
in [Davis](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#7870988186214123930),
as it grants us the privaliege. But you are awere of what we may expect,
of beings that \<have\> conducted as they have.... My
Dear [Emma](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#11795681255256261254) I
think of you and the children continualy, if I could tell you my tale, I
think you would say it was altogether enough for once, to grattify the
malice of hell that I have suffered. I want \<to\> see
little Frederick, [Joseph](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#17702703245817937874),
[Julia](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#17666438780509764612),
and [Alexander](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#10175318747758765392), Joana,
and old major. And as to yourself if you want to know how much I want to
see you, examine your feelings, how much you want to see me, and judge
for \<you\[r\]self\>, I would gladly go \<walk\> from here to you
barefoot, and bareheaded, and half naked, to see you and think it great
pleasure, and never count it toil, but do not think I am babyish, for I
do not feel so, I bare with fortitude all my oppression, so does do
those that are with me, not one of us have flinched yet, I
want you \<should\> not let those little fellows, forgit me, tell them
Father loves them with a perfect love, and he is doing all he can to git
away from the mob to come to them, do teach them all you can, that they
may have good minds, be tender and kind to them, dont \<be\> fractious
to them, but listen to their wants, tell them Father says they must be
good children, \<and\> mind their mother, My Dear
[Emma](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-4-april-1839/1#11429993408598412624) there
is great respo\[n\]sibility resting upon you, in preserveing yourself in
honor, and sobriety, before them, and teaching them right things, to
form their young and tender minds, that they begin in right paths, and
not git contaminated when young, by seeing ungodly examples, I soppose
you see the need of my council, and help,
but as \<a\> combinnation \<of\> things have conspired to place me
where I am, and I know it \<is\> not my fault, and further if my voice
and council, had been heeded I should not have been here, but I find no
fault with you, att all I know nothing but what you have done the best
you could, if there is any thing it is known to yourself, you must be
your own judge, on that subject: and if ether of done us have done wrong
it is wise in us to repent of it, and for God sake, do not b\[e\] so
foolish as to yield to the flattery of the Devel, faslshoods,
and vainty, in this hour of trouble, that our affections be drawn, away
from the right objects, those preasious things, God has given us will
rise up in judgement against us in the day of judgement against us if
we do not mark well our steps, and ways....

You\[rs?\] \[Joseph Smith Jr.\]"

There is a lot more in that letter we could talk about, but it's not
really relevant. Jo basically just tells Emma to be super faithful and
not to give in to temptation and be a good Mom, stuff she never possibly
could have known without him sending this letter which once again,
didn't make any reference to how much Jo loves her. He talks about the
kids and says he would walk miles barefoot to see her, but still he
didn't devote any of his amazing talents with words to telling Emma how
much he loves and misses her.

The letter is historically relevant just as is it relevant to giving us
a window into what Jo and Emma's relationship was going through at this
time. Jo told Emma that he and the other prisoners would only be
spending one more night in Liberty Jail before they were transferred to
have a hearing in front of the honorable Judge George Thompkins. This
transfer was granted and the Mormon leaders finally had a brief grand
jury trial to ascertain legitimate charges.

Judge George Thompkins heard their case on Apr 11, 1839 and delivered a
judgement the following day. He officially charged Jo and the others
with everything the court of inquiry had charged against them, but
Thompkins knew how hard it was to deal with the Mormons. He didn't want
to acquit them of their charges as it would likely be the end of his
career. He didn't want to charge them with anything more, because, what
else do you possibly charge them with, you already landed the murder,
treason, arson, and theft, a death sentence in most states back then.

Somebody, there's no way of knowing who, came up with the only possible
way to somehow put justice on hold and make the best of the situation.
If the Mormons couldn't get justice in Missouri, at least the state
wouldn't be responsible for killing them which was the inevitable
conclusion to a full conviction of the charged offenses. Somebody issued
a writ to transfer the prisoners to Boone county. A man named Sheriff
William Morgan took custody of the prisoners. I'll let a legitimate
historian tell the story from here. It should be noted that Brodie
claims in No Man Knows My History that Jo was the person who petitioned
for the change of venue, but I can't seem to verify that claim.

This is an excerpt from page 56-7 of Pistol-Packin'-Porter's seminal
biography by Harold Schindler titled "Orrin Porter Rockwell, Man of
God/Son of Thunder".

"...in early April 1839, the prisoners were returned to Gallatin to
appear before a grand jury. On April 12\[,\] the panel returned a true
bill against Joseph, Hyrum, Wight, McRae, and Baldwin for "murder,
treason, burglary, arson, larceny, theft and stealing." Rigdon had
previously been admitted to bail and had fled Missouri to join church
members at Quincy, Illinois.

Quite unexpectedly, three days later the court ordered a change of venue
and the five Mormons were placed in the custody of Sheriff William
Morgan to be transferred to Boone County for sentencing. It was apparent
that the move was being made in a deliberate maneuver to provide the
prisoners with a chance to make a break. While many Missourians still
pressured to have the Mormons hanged, several officials in high places,
perhaps Boggs himself, had come to the realization that an "escape"
would be convenient to all concerned, since the fugitives certainly
would leave the state at the first opportunity, and it was unlikely that
they would return, with a grand jury indictment hanging over their
heads. Accordingly, Sheriff Morgan and his guards conveniently became
intoxicated during the ride to Boone County. Late that night the five
prisoners galloped across the border into Illinois.

With the Mormon prophet out of their grasp, the enraged Missouri
population completely razed church settlements in Daviess, Clay,
Caldwell, and Ray counties, shooting livestock, firing homes, and
stealing everything left behind. The handful of remaining Saints hastily
packed what they could and made tracks for Illinois.

Little love was lost between the Illinoisians and their Missouri
neighbors and when the story of the Mormon expulsion spread across the
state line, the people of the town of Quincy were quick to offer solace
and hospitality. They also extended a blanket invitation for the Saints
to resettle in Illinois, a suggestion the Mormons eagerly accepted...

Exhausted and hungry, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Alexander
McRae, and Caleb Baldwin rode into Quincy on April 22. "Thank God we
have been delivered," the prophet said as his family and friends ran to
embrace him. Among them was Orrin Porter Rockwell."

The prophet was finally free, having set up the escape plan with unknown
entities and successfully bribing Sheriff William Morgan and his men
with some powerful sweetened whiskey. Jo, Hyrum and the other men
effected their escape without looking back.

One of the reasons Jo wasn't let out on the Habeas Corpus hearing along
with Rigdon was because the authorities knew he would abscond as soon as
he was released, that's why he was stuck in prison for over 5 months, Jo
was kinda slippery when it came to the law. This was still over half a
century before the FBI was created and there was any structured
interstate police force in existence. This had been a recurring theme
for states since the Articles of Confederation were drawn up, how do
states police criminals who cross state lines? The Missouri law
enforcement knew that Jo would cross a state line as soon as he could
escape the clutches of the jailors, which he did, nullifying their
jurisdiction over him. Jo made a habit of removing himself from a state
where there were criminal charges against him. Whether it was New York,
Ohio, Missouri, or anywhere in between, Jo was quick to flee the state
and escape the previous state's enforcement jurisdiction when trouble
arose.

Word spread to the Saints on the banks of the Mississippi that the
prophet would be heard in court for a Grand Jury trial. Many of the
Mormons were of the opinion that the whole thing was religious
persecution, just like Jo and Rigdon thought. They had been told by the
leadership the whole time that the Missouri government are all mobocrats
hell-bent of persecuting the Mormons, and the persecution narrative was
literally real to them. Mormons today don't understand all the factors
that went into the Mormons being removed from Missouri, and I would
wager a guess that many Mormons back then didn't even know all the
reasons why they were being chased out either. It likely seemed like
strictly religious persecution to them, the same way it's viewed by
Mormons today, but that ignores massive swaths of competing factors and
complicated politics which played into the situation much more so than
the religious aspect.

Some sections I cut out of the petition to Judge George Thompkins were
these massive chunks where Jo tells the judge how everybody in Missouri
was against him, he was terribly abused by the Missouri militia, and
that he was completely innocent and could prove himself such if given
the opportunity to state his case. Well, just like in the court of
inquiry, usually in Grand Jury trials the defendant doesn't get to state
their case. The grand jury is held by the prosecution to determine if
there's enough evidence to move forward with a full jury trial. However,
according to Brodie, Jo did make the motion to change venue to Boone
county to get an objective panel of judges, which the court accepted. It
was during that transfer to Boone that Jo and friends were able to flee
the drunken clutches of Sheriff Morgan and his men and make their way
across the state line to Illinois. And, of course, thanks to the lack of
interstate law enforcement, nobody had jurisdiction to follow Jo and
enforce the grand jury indictment for capital offenses.

The bribe Jo offered Sheriff Morgan was known and rather substantial,
but a very small price to pay when taken on balance of the death penalty
inevitably awaiting Jo. In addition to the whiskey sweetened with honey,
they also agreed upon \$800 and payment for the horses. A few weeks
after this somebody spotted the Sheriff in Quincy collecting on his
bribe. The Missourians were understandably not pleased, but the whole
Mormon problem had been essentially solved in their opinion, so they
didn't pursue any legal action against the Sheriff for his corruption.
The majority of the Missourians just ignored the Mormons by the end of
April 1839 as there were so few Mormons remaining in Missouri to even
bother the anti-Mormon citizens there.

But really, when it all comes down to it, wasn't this the best possible
option? Consider what should have happened vs. what did happen and
skepticize what the best option was. I'm all for people paying the price
when they break the law, but it's important to be reasonable and
consider the real legal ramifications of any situation this incredibly
complex.

Ideally speaking, Jo and the other dozen plus members of Mormon
leadership should have appeared in front of a Missouri court in a county
where they hadn't influenced the public one way or another, trying to
get as unbiased of a judge as possible. The prosecution should have been
able to charge the Mormons with everything they charged and then put
them back in jail until a proper jury trial happened. In addition to
that, Jo and the Mormons should have filed a countersuit against the
state of Missouri for wrongful treatment and not protecting life liberty
and free exercise of the Mormons, which would have dragged in Colonel
Thomas Jennings and his men for executing the Haun's Mill massacre
without any orders, a malicious capital offense perpetrated by a
state-sanctioned militia commanding officer. Judgement would come out
one way or another and the Mormons and their leaders would have been
entangled in a legal battle for years to come trying to get Jo freed
from jail as well as some kind of recourse for being removed from
Missouri on nothing more than surrender charges with a bunch of wrongful
deaths from state militia officials. Jo likely would have spent much of
this time in jail until he could be acquitted of all the charges against
him for treason, arson, all that good stuff, or the conviction would
have gone through and the long process of appeals prior to execution
would have begun. If the chips did fall that way, Joseph Smith may very
well have been executed by the United States government for treason and
murder if this all went down according to law. But, that would require
classifying him as a military commanding officer as opposed to a
religious leader. Given the Mormon's history in Missouri, those lines
were pretty blurry when it came right down to everything Jo had done.
How would executing a religious leader look on Missouri's record of case
law? The point is, some variation of that is what should have happened
ideally to get a fair trial, not necessarily speedy, but fair and legal.

Well, the state of Missouri was in a bad legal spot in different ways
than the Mormons, but everybody had broken the law and the Missouri
government had violated the constitution. If this case got out of hand
the spotlight would be on Missouri to handle this the right way, moreso
than it already was to see how they would handle the Mormon situation.
Damned if you do, damned if you don't. The whole legal scenario was
unpopular for different groups of people for different reasons, it was a
no-win conundrum.

The state could go through all this and spend hundreds of thousands if
not millions of dollars and a number of years convicting Joseph Smith
after they'd already spent millions on the whole Mormon problem so far.
No possible outcome looked good for anybody involved.

So, what's the simplest solution? You let them escape. It's the most
pragmatic compromise where nobody is actually satisfied, but at least
people aren't rioting in the streets because the government executed a
religious leader or they let a traitor who killed American soldiers go
free. With an escape, all you're doing is looking the other way and
passively exporting the Mormon problem to the next sucker of a state to
take them in, which just so happened to be Illinois in this case. It
really was the only reasonable way to handle this without years of court
battles and countless expended resources to bring the Mormon leaders to
justice, which would uncover a lot of bad moves on the state's part that
they'd rather not discuss. Nobody wanted to deal with this problem,
which is made even clearer when we consider that the petition to form a
committee investigating how the Mormons were treated in Missouri was
tabled until July 1839, 2.5 months after the prophet escaped and many
more months after nearly every Mormon was gone and their houses were all
burned to the ground.

Everybody wanted the problem to go away, and it did. Rigdon and the
other church leaders had done well in befriending Isaac Galland. Once Jo
escaped he was made aware of the forces Galland had been exerting to
help the Mormons in Illinois and Iowa. Here's a couple of excerpts of a
letter exchange between Galland and Governor Lucas of Iowa taken from
Vogel's source and critical text of the history of the church vol. 3
pages 291-2:

"...The testimony of Governor Lucas as to the good moral character of
these people \[Mormons\], I think will have its deserved influence upon
the people of Illinois, in encouraging our citizens in their humane and
benevolent exertions to relieve this distressed people, who are now
wandering in our neighborhoods without comfortable food, raiment, or a
shelter from the pelting storm.

Isaac Galland"

"... I received your letter of the 25^th^..., in which you give a short
account of the sufferings of the people called the Mormons and ask
"whether they could be permitted to purchase lands and settle upon them,
in the Territory of Iowa, and there worship Almighty God according to
the dictates of their own consciences, secure from oppression," &c...

In answer to your inquiry, I would say that I know of no authority that
can constitutionally deprive them of this right... "No person demeaning
himself in a peaceable and orderly manner, shall ever be molested on
account of his mode of worship or religious sentiments in said
Territory."

These principles I trust will ever be adhered to in the Territory of
Iowa. They make no distinction between religious sects. They extend
equal privileges and protection to all; each must rest upon its own
merits, and will prosper in proportion to the purity of its principles,
and the fruit of holiness and piety produced thereby.

Governor Robert Lucas \[Iowa\]"

Isaac Galland was a powerful ally to have and made himself a crucial
asset to Jo and the church. Really, without him, who knows how the
church would have landed in Illinois or even if they would have remained
there. Makes you wonder, if only the Mormons had done this same
schmoozing with Governor Boggs when they first began moving in to
Jackson County Missouri, maybe the whole 1838 Mormon war wouldn't have
happened and the Mormons may never have been removed from Missouri in
the first place. That's just one of those historical thought experiments
that are fun to occasionally play with.

That's a valid takeaway. If you're going to settle in a previously
unsettled area, it may benefit you to make friends with the authorities
in that area. Jo and the Mormons had settled in a number of areas en
masse without really talking to relevant people about it before doing
so. Take that example of Jackson County Missouri. They didn't talk to
the legislature or any of the government for that matter when they first
set their sights on Independence, they just came in and declared
Independence as their holy land, Zion.

What happened in the bible when somebody was on the Israelites promised
land? What happened to the Canaanites, Midianites, Amalekites, and a
number of other -ites lost to history when Yahweh decided they were on
the Israelites land? Was it really that *irrational* to think the
Mormons may treat the Missourites the same way? Well yeah it was, but Jo
didn't always operate within the boundaries of rationality. When the
Mormons were chased out of Jackson County Jo led an army of 200 men to
Jackson county for the purpose of restoring the Mormons to Zion. What
did that look like in his mind? Did that mean open armed-conflict? If
not then why were all 200 men armed in the first place? Come one,
there's only one reason to march 200 armed men over 800 miles.

I guess the overall point would be that Jo figured out when he needed
help and let the people who were in the proper position do what they
could to help him. Galland was a wealthy land owner, the governor needed
to be aware of and approve the Mormons moving in, Brigham was good with
running the business, Rigdon was able to schmooze the necessary people
when he told them of the Mormons' persecution in Missouri. Every one of
these people played their part in getting the Mormons situated in
Illinois to the point that they could build a new community from
scratch. The swath of land which the church purchased from Galland
called Commerce was just a swampland with a couple dinky run-down farms
on it. Fast-forward 4 years and Nauvoo was a sprawling metropolis with a
population rivaling Chicago of nearly exclusively Mormons. In order to
construct his empire, Jo needed a lot of help, and the people were
willing to do their duty to Zion.
