---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 83 - CC Polygamy Pt6 Roy Jeffs Pt1'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-83-cc-polygamy-pt6-roy-jeffs-pt1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-83-cc-polygamy-pt6-roy-jeffs-pt1
category: History
date: 2017-12-29 01:13:58 +0000
---

12/28/17

Ep 83 -- CC Polygamy Pt6 Roy Jeffs Pt1

On this episode, we invite on one of Warren Jeffs' sons, Roy, to tell us
his walk through growing up as a millennial in the FLDS under Rulon and
Warren Jeffs. Roy's story is very compelling and he has a lot to tell
the world. Check out his other interviews and appearances in media in
the following links.

Links:

Year of Polygamy Roy Jeffs\
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/year-of-polygamy/episode-119-the-prophets-son-an-interview-with-roy-jeffs-part-one/>\
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/year-of-polygamy/episode-119-the-prophets-son-an-interview-with-roy-jeffs-part-two/>

CNN Interview\
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/09/30/us/warren-jeffs-son-speaks-out/index.html>

Daily Mail article\
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3258425/Work-camps-daily-confession-constant-fear-Warren-Jeffs-Son-cult-leader-opens-tormented-life-father-s-warped-religious-sect.html>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The interview you're going to listen to today was conducted a few months
ago as I was starting my deeper studies into polygamy. Roy Jeffs had
given a presentation at Sunstone Symposium in July of 2017 and I was
incredibly fascinated and wanted to offer him the platform of this
podcast to tell his story. Roy offers us an interesting window into the
day-to-day life inside Warren Jeffs' FLDS commune in Short Creek Utah
and Arizona. I wasn't as aware of much of modern-day polygamy when I
conducted the interview as I am now and you'll hear that crop up from
time to time during the interview. Needless to say, Roy tells us so much
information that really needs to be out there. The interview is two
hours in total so I decided to break it up into two parts to make it a
bit more digestible for listening. Tune in next week for part 2 of Roy's
interview where we dive into his transition out of the FLDS religion.
Without further ado, here's Roy Jeffs...

That concludes part 1 of our interview with Roy. I want to thank him so
much for coming onto the show to share so much with us, and thank you to
Lindsay Park for coordinating the logistics of the interview.

One thing which I can't escape is the mind-games and controlling
mechanisms employed by Warren as the prophet of the cult.

Constant separation from anybody he cared about.

I just want to share a few thoughts after listening back to the
interview in the editing room. I think Roy gave us a brief window into
what life was like inside the Short Creek area as Warren Jeffs rose to
power and began running the area and the whole religion as the
prophet-in-chief. I couldn't help but notice the various mechanisms
employed by Warren that effectively isolated and kept Roy inside his
indoctrination, mechanisms he probably used to isolate and galvanize
many of the FLDS.

To begin with, Warren never represented a father figure in the home. Roy
had very few memories with Warren and most of those involved strongly
worded guidance delivered from on high, chastising Roy for sins, whether
or not he actually committed them. As an effect of an absentee father
figure, sister-wives become incredibly independent and powerful women,
and the children, like Roy, bond with their mothers. Just as Roy was
coming into maturity, Warren held some kind of inquisition of his family
and removed all Roy's brothers and sisters under the age of 8, leaving
their family utterly broken and Roy's mother in shambles. After that,
Roy was torn from his mother and taken hundreds of miles away, only
causing further psychological damage and trauma.

Accompanying all of these traumatic events were the teachings of the
prophet and complete isolation from any outside information. Add that
into Roy's weekly letters he sent to the prophet confessing every sinful
thought which crossed his mind, and the self-policing nature these
insular religious communities create with every person tattling on their
neighbor; it's not hard to see how the prophet was able to assert and
maintain absolute totalitarian control.

But when we look at this as a pyramid with Warren sitting comfortably
atop, it ignores the fact that Warren Jeffs also grew up in a very
similar society under absolute totalitarian control under Leroy Johnson
and his father, Rulon Jeffs. The same controlling mechanisms which
Warren asserted over Roy were asserted over him from a very young age,
and we see the cycle of profound psychological damage perpetuate.

The truth of the matter is, there is no simple fix to this. We can say
the religious aspect of the FLDS is the problem, or the polygamy aspect,
or the child abuse aspect, or the government fraud aspect are the
problem, and they are all definite problems, but they're merely
symptomatic of the cult mentality which puts people in a state of mind
where all of these heinous actions are acceptable, or even considered
normal.

This mindset relies on an otherizing system of us vs. them and
protecting the "us" with an incessant persecution complex, which is only
made worse when any government action is taken to mitigate the flagrant
abuses committed by the FLDS elite. When the bystander effect keeps
people from taking any action to reform or change things from the
inside, thousands of people can find themselves locked in a religious
society where questioning or raising any concerns about immoral actions
can earn swift exile from that person's community and family. There are
no simple solutions. We can only educate ourselves and try to build
bridges with these communities. We need to spend time learning from
people like Roy who've gone through these upbringings, and if we
understand them, maybe we can find more effective ways of educating them
to help them understand a different perspective of their own religion.

Education is the key, and that's never simple.
