---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 78 - CC Polygamy Pt1
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-78-cc-polygamy-pt1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-78-cc-polygamy-pt1
category: History
date: 2017-11-24 15:17:29 PST
---

Ep 78 – CC Polygamy Pt1

On this episode, we finally dive into polygamy. We’re ramping up for
polygamy in Nauvoo prior to April 1841, but before doing so we have to
set the historical stage to understand the world from which Mormon
polygamy evolved. We begin with marriage from the dawn of historical
time and skim across the top of major world religions throughout most of
written history to finally arrive at the post-enlightenment western
world filled with small groups of free-love proto-hippies. This is part
1 of a multi-part series on Mormon polygamy.

Links:

Code of Ur Nammu  
<http://www.polk.k12.ga.us/userfiles/644/Classes/177912/Code%20of%20Ur-Nammu.pdf>

History of Marriage – Alex Gendler  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZZ6QB5TSfk>

1955 Hindu Marriage Act  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hindu_Marriage_Act,_1955>

Polygamy in Judaism  
<http://www.benyehuda.us/poligamy.htm>

1908 Jewish encyclopedia on Polygamy  
<http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/12260-polygamy>

Saint Augustine On the Good of Marriage  
<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/1309.htm>

Adamite or Adamian free-love church  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adamites>

History of United Methodist and Wesley Brothers  
<http://www.umc.org/who-we-are/roots>

Quran Surah 4 an-Nisaa  
<https://quran.com/4>

Polygyny in Islam  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygyny_in_Islam>

Martin Luther’s writings on Polygamy  
<http://beggarsallreformation.blogspot.com/2009/01/luther-i-confess-that-i-cannot-forbid.html>

Martin Luther wiki page  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther#Marriage>

Munster Rebellion wiki page  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%BCnster_rebellion>

Free-love societies  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_love>

Polygamy vs. Monogamy population study  
<https://www.livescience.com/13010-polygamy-good-men-bad-women.html>

William Blake Visions of the Daughters of Albion  
<https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Visions_of_the_Daughters_of_Albion>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Human sexuality is a powerful force which drives or governs many of our
actions. Sex is the sole mechanism by which our species persists and
flourishes and through a myriad of selective pressures we’ve come to
find ourselves living in a world where sex is primarily viewed through a
religious lens. Until recently, it was strictly priests or some other
religious leader who would approve of and officiate a marriage ceremony,
usually interviewing the individuals to be married prior to performing
the ceremony to give what they saw as sound marriage advice and to
determine whether or not said religious leader approved of the pairing.
In so many cultures throughout history, and even today, nobody enjoys
marriage without the stamp of approval from the minister, reverend, or
bishop. Today we have secular celebrants, and the act of getting married
amounts to nothing more than two people signing a secular document in
front of a judge at the courthouse, yet the grandiose ceremony with no
real-world application still survives. Two people come together with
each family on either side of the isle, a priest or some qualified
officiator makes a profound speech full of platitudes that don’t
actually help the couple live their day-to-day life, after which said
officiator pronounces the people married and gives them permission to
kiss and then the crowd throws rice at the newlyweds, somebody’s uncle
breaks a glass in a washcloth, people likely get drunk and dance, and
the ceremony is over. But all of that is just a show. What really
matters is the secular document they signed granting them a marriage
license, which determines them to be married. Everything else is a
largely sectarian holdover from our earliest societies where these
ceremonies were truly significant.

If we think back to the tribal foundations of marriage ceremonies, they
were crucial to making and keeping peace among different tribes of
people. Picture the prototypical two warring tribes led by elder alpha
warriors. They finally have enough of killing each other and the two
tribe leaders decide to wed their children and intermingle DNA in order
to bind the two families together, signaling to the rest of both tribes
that the other tribe are friendly and they can all intermarry and
everybody lives happy lives without having to worry about the other
tribe killing them. Now this bigger tribe can find another smaller tribe
and fight with them until they’re wiped out or until they come to an
agreement and marry together more of the alphas children, and so on and
so forth until tribes become large enough to conquer by sword or by
marriage large swaths of land. These ceremonies were largely conducted
by the spiritual or religious leaders of the tribes and they served an
actual purpose in uniting clans and passing daughters off as property.

Which brings us to another use for marriage, property exchange. My great
warrior, Bogran, go conquer our promised land inhabited by those
infidels and you can have your pick of my daughters for a wife. Or, two
men make a business deal in buying or selling land or goods, one of the
guys might throw in a daughter to sweeten the deal and ensure smooth
transition of property. It all comes down to some way of intermingling
DNA to express good will between two people or groups of people.

One significant piece which cannot be ignored in the historical marriage
formula is purity. The only way to ensure that a man’s children were
indeed his own was for him to marry a virgin woman. The male’s virginity
is rarely ever an issue so the weight of staying pure usually falls to
women. A woman’s worth is determined by her purity. One man with three
beautiful virgin daughters could wealthier than a man with 10 beautiful
non-virgin daughters for trade. It’s how humans have commodified our
most basic natural instinct to reproduce. Along with any commodity, the
wealthiest tend to amass more of it than the less wealthy. A poor
sharecropper needs one wife with 12 kids to work the fields, but the
nobleman may have 5 houses, 3000 acres, 15 wives, and 35 kids, that’s
just how society was structured in a world where women are property.

It wouldn’t be until the 20<sup>th</sup> century when the newfound craze
of love-marriages would begin making its way into American culture.
Prior to that, it was a lucky convenience if love was present in a
marriage, but definitely not a necessity. Often a love interest would
develop between two people in courtship, but the business aspect of the
marriage would fall out and the marriage wouldn’t go through. Sometimes
love interests would develop between people who were never allowed to
get married.

In each and every one of these examples, it’s been largely incumbent
upon the established religion or spiritualism to ascribe specific value
and restrictions on a person’s sexuality. We have innate human instincts
which push us towards having a single partner and saving child rearing
for that person, but religions have been able to apply words of value to
sexuality and punishment for the unauthorized practice thereof. You’re
chaste and pure or you’re defiled and damned. Love and doting follow
one, shame and exile follow the other. In much the same way sexuality
has been successfully commodified, it’s been weaponized with the
complicated emotions surrounding this basic human practice.

Think about this on an individual level. If something sexually entices
us, that’s attractive, beautiful, sensual. But what about a specific
sexual practice that we don’t like? It’s disgusting, perverse, and
sinful. All of those are words we ascribe to deep human emotions of
liking or disliking something when it comes to sexuality.

Everybody is different. Most of us fall into a few simplistic categories
we ascribe to what we like and dislike about sexuality, most people fall
into the cys-hetero, but it’s only been recently in broad American
culture that we’ve been acknowledging the existence of sexuality outside
of these societal norms. Gay rights have opened up avenues of discussion
to all points on the sexuality spectrum to be defined. What started as
acknowledgement that some people don’t like the other sex has evolved
into more healthy discussions of what everybody likes and dislikes
sexually. Transsexual people have a seat at the table where they never
seemed to be a topic of discussion before. Queer people not defined by
simple categories are taking back the word from being a pejorative slur.
Bisexual people who refuse to follow only the cys-hetero side of their
sexual identity are finding it easier to have conversations about who
and what they find enticing. People with fetishes the mainstream
considers weird live in online communities filled with pros sharing tips
on how to tie up their partner without giving them rope burn. Some
people can’t get off without putting themselves or their partner in
situations which require safewords. Some people are genuinely attracted
to only children and resort to predatory practices to get their fix
because children can’t legally consent. Some people are poly-pansexual,
open to every kind of love from every kind of person, many of whom
choose to live in small communes of like-minded folk who spend every
night in a different bed with different partners, shunning off the
orthodoxy of the society around them.

Today begins a multiple-part series breaking down the most notable,
salacious, and attention-grabbing aspect of Mormonism and Mormon
history, polygamy.

Polygamy in Mormonism is something we’ve briefly discussed up to this
point in our historical timeline, but it’s a topic which has enjoyed an
incredible breadth of scholarship and exposure over the history of the
church. In toiling with how to present this without redoing what Lindsay
Park did with Year of Polygamy or just reading an audio version of Todd
Compton’s book, In Sacred Loneliness, I’m left with the task of
conveying the importance and historical impact of polygamy in Mormonism
without making it the primary focus of our overarching Nauvoo analysis.

Let’s lay out a roadmap of how these next few episodes will go. We’ll
begin with defining some terms and discussing polyamorous and
wife-swapping societies and cultures in Europe and America which led up
to or possibly even influenced Mormonism. Then we’ll dig into the
subject of polygamy in Kirtland and Nauvoo and skim over some of Utah
Polygamy in the 19<sup>th</sup> century. After that we’re going to look
at later iterations and how polygamy was practiced all through the
20<sup>th</sup> century into the modern-day with a focus on various
Mormon factions which broke from the Brighamite and Reorganized
orthodoxy. We’ll have interviews peppered throughout the episodes from
people with experiences in polygamy to spice things up and bring some
first-hand knowledge to the table.

One quick word before jumping in. I’m going to stay as far away from
ought as possible and just talk about what is. The issue with talking
polygamy and other forms of lifestyle and sexual preference choices is
not asserting one specific lifestyle over the other as superior. That
being said, inherent in many of these polygamous societies is a
patriarchal power dynamic which bears examination and scrutiny. Informed
consent is a tough requirement to parse out of such societies when
entire lifestyles are structured around a few powerful men controlling
subservient women and child-slave laborers to keep the society afloat.
We’ll discuss these foundational aspects of common polygamous cultures
when we get there. Also, one more quick addition, I have very little
control over what the guests may say in the interviews and their biases
come into play given their experiences, but those experiences are valid
and what they say is based on those experiences. Join me in this stroll
through polygamy in history.

Let’s define a few loaded terms which will be very useful in our
examination of polygamy.

Polygamy merely means many spouses, whereas monogamy is one spouse.
While we think monogamous societies have been the norm because it is in
most societies today, polygamy in some form has existed for much longer
than we have written history and was often reserved for the wealthiest
in structured societies.

Polygyny is what we focus on primarily when it comes to Mormonism.
Polygyny is specifically one man with multiple wives, while polyandry is
one woman with many husbands.

Polyamory is from Greek meaning many-love. Polyamory as it’s defined
modernly is the practice of intimate relationships with more than one
partner, with the knowledge of all partners. It has been described as
"consensual, ethical, and responsible non-monogamy”.

Adultery or affairs are simply where one person in a committed
monogamous relationship has extra-marital relations with one or multiple
people without the knowledge or consent of their spouse.

Wife-swapping is simply a colloquial term for swinging or two couple
trading spouses.

Spiritual Wifery was a term used by Mormons and anti-Mormons as a
pejorative for unauthorized polygyny.

Polygamy has been a part of most societies dating before we have written
history. The Code of Ur Nammu, the oldest text we have for the
establishment of a government written between 2100-2050 BCE in Sumerian
was discovered in Mesopotamia on two stone tablets, which was translated
in the mid-20<sup>th</sup> century. Nailing down government laws and
ordinances or even socially acceptable forms of marriage prior to this
is an exercise in futility as only small fragments of tablets remain. We
can rest assured that polygamy was not only seen as socially acceptable,
but was the societal norm, especially for elites in society. From all we
can tell, strict monogamy as the societal norm has only arisen in
various sedentary agricultural cultures in relatively recent history. A
few relevant extracts from the Code of Ur Nammu which sound oddly
similar to what survived in some of the laws included in the Torah:

“4. If a slave marries a slave, and that slave is set free, he does not
leave the household.  
• 5. If a slave marries a native (i.e. free) person, he/she is to hand
the firstborn son over to his owner.  
• 6. If a man violates the right of another and deflowers the virgin
wife of a young man, they shall kill that male.  
• 7. If the wife of a man followed after another man and he slept with
her, they shall slay that woman, but that male shall be set free. (§4 in
some translations)  
• 8. If a man proceeded by force, and deflowered the virgin female slave
of another man, that man must pay five shekels of silver. (5)  
• 9. If a man divorces his first-time wife, he shall pay her one mina of
silver. (6)  
• 10. If it is a (former) widow whom he divorces, he shall pay her half
a mina of silver. (7)  
• 11. If the man had slept with the widow without there having been any
marriage contract, he need not pay any silver. (8)  
• 25. If a man’s slave-woman, comparing herself to her mistress, speaks
insolently to her, her mouth shall be scoured with 1 quart of salt.
(22)”

From this Code of Ur Nammu, we can see a number of laws governing
marriage, but it doesn’t specify anything about monogamy vs. polygamy.
What does seem to arise is the fact that women were mere property and
having some property doesn’t limit your ability to gain other property.
It does have 2 provisions sanctioning divorce, so we can understand that
marriage as an institution predates the text and was considered the
status quo. However, given how the text reads in limiting the practice
of adultery, i.e. killing the woman and setting the man free when said
affair happens, it does express how vital to society marriage was. How
else to you ensure that your children are actually yours? I’m asking
that of the men, of course, because these laws were written by men for
men to govern a society dominated by men, which will be a recurring
theme throughout most of what we discuss in relation to marriage and
polygamy.

The code does state that if a slave-woman insolently compares herself to
a man’s mistress, that she’ll be punished by scouring of the mouth with
a quart of salt. Mistresses and concubines were simply a part of the
status quo, and slave-women were also seemingly treated as sex toys by
their masters.

The Code of Ur Nammu is a secular text. There are no provisions about
religious practice or limitations anywhere in the text. This was purely
a piece issued for the governance of a polytheistic pagan society for
the betterment of said society. Most of the other provisions I didn’t
read just lay out the punishments for assaulting somebody else or how
land contracts are to be dealt with. You can check the show notes for a
link to the entire translation.

If we zoom out to the history of world cultures and marriage practices,
polygamy was the societal norm, and today only about ¼ of cultures
strictly prohibit polygamy. You’ll find a link in the show notes to a
TED ed animated video titled “The history of marriage by Alex Gendler”
which examines the history of marriage from ancient societies to modern
day and I would strongly recommend giving it a watch. It really
illustrates how prevalent polygamy was and is and how rare monogamy has
been as the status quo in historical societies.

Many religious texts divinely sanction or command polygamy in certain
instances. The Rig Veda, compiled as part of the Hindu canon sometime
between 1700 and 1100 BCE includes a few passages relating to polygamy.

It sanctions the practice of polygamy for one man of multiple women of
lower castes, provided his first wife was of his caste. Typically only
reserved for the elites in society as women were and are seen as
property, men of lower castes marrying multiple women of even lower
castes is usually only practiced when the first wife is unable to bear
children and often only limited to one extra wife.

“According to [Vishnu
Smriti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vishnu_Smriti), the number of
wives is linked to the caste system:

Now a Brāhmaṇa may take four wives in the direct order of the (four)
castes;  
A [Kshatriya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kshatriya), three;.  
A [Vaishya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaishya), two  
A [Shudra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shudra), one only

This linkage of the number of permitted wives to the caste system is
also supported by Baudhayana Dharmasutra and Paraskara Grihyasutra.

The Apastamba Dharmasutra and Manusmriti allow a second wife if the
first one is unable to discharge her religious duties or is unable to
bear a son.”

In 1955, the Parliament of India enacted the Hindu Marriage act, which
made polygamy illegal for Hindus living in India. This is a small
snapshot of the text from the act:

“This Act applies -

1.  > to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or
    > developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of
    > the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj;

2.  > to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion; and

3.  > to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act
    > extends who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion,
    > unless it is proved that any such person would not have been
    > governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of
    > that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if
    > this Act had not been passed.”
    > <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hindu_Marriage_Act,_1955>

Any person not practicing Hinduism wasn’t included in the polygamy
restriction. Polygamy is still legal for every other religion in India.

As for Buddhism, with a religion with so many adherents and spreading
across such vast swaths of geography, polygamy and how it’s treated in
society varies substantially. Most Buddhist areas tacitly approve of
polygamy, but many of these cultures see it as a substandard form of
marriage and consider any man who seeks a second wife to be on the
decline in his first marriage, and possibly on the decline in society in
general.

With such a rich history of over 3000 years, spanning so many areas with
billions of adherents, it’s really hard to quantify the stance of
Hinduism and Buddhism when it comes to polygamy, especially because what
is approved of or disparaged in society is largely limited to geography.
Two groups living in Southwestern China could both be Buddhist with one
group practicing polygamy while the other forbade it, there’s just no
simple description either of these religions fit into when it comes to
monogamy vs. polygamy.

Once we dive into Judaism and cultures throughout the near and middle
east spanning to western cultures, polygamy is largely enshrined in
society as normative and has plenty of scriptural basis.

“Polygamy in Judaism

Polygamy was such a well \[-\] established part of the social system
that Mosaic law is not even critical of it. We find only certain
regulations with respect to it; as, for example, if a man takes a second
wife the economic position of the first wife and of the children she
bore must be secure; and, in the case of inheritance, no child of a
subsequent marriage is to be preferred over a child from the first wife.
Other regulations were that the high priest could have only one wife and
that a king in Israel should not have too many wives \[Lev. 21:13; Deut.
17:17; Ex. 21:10\]. The last injunction, however, was of no effect.
David had seven wives before he began to reign in Jerusalem, and an
extraordinary number of wives and concubines has been attributed to
Solomon \[II Sam 3:2-5, 14; 5:13\]. In connection with David, the
prophet Nathan did not denounce the king for adding Uriah's wife to
those he already had but ‘only’ for the means he employed to make her
free to marry him. \[II Sam. 12:7-15\]

However, if polygamy was not forbidden – it was also certainly not
directly sanctioned. It is also a fact that it was most certainly not
recommended. The Torah, in the story of the creation of the woman as a
"helpmate to man" with the "operation" of creating her out of the man's
rib only reinforces the concept, "And Adam said, This is now bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was
taken out of Man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave to his wife; and they shall be one flesh." \[Gen.
2:23,24\] The ideal situation, these verses of Torah teach us, are for a
man and a woman to become one unit. Polygamy was a socially accepted
norm from the pre-Abrahamic past and it was left undisturbed. As the
civilization of the people reached a higher plateau and, especially
under the teaching of the prophets, the Jewish people’s moral and
religious consciousness developed, the polygamous marriage system
gradually declined. This is noticeable in Israel after the return from
the Exile. In the Second Commonwealth polygamy is far from general. Yet
it survived far into the Christian era. In fact, if we study the New
Testament as a Jewish source book, we must take note that Jesus, as a
Jewish preacher of his era, neither condemns polygamous unions nor
advocates a change in the system. From this noninterference attitude
Luther, as late as the 16th cent., arrived at the conclusion that he
could not forbid the taking of more than one wife\!”
<http://www.benyehuda.us/poligamy.htm>

When it comes to theologians and religious authorities trotting out the
arguments for and against polygamy in Abrahamic traditions, there is no
way to use the Torah or Bible to condemn polygamy. We can look at the
creation myth of the Abrahamic religions and see that Adam had only one
wife and claim that was how God wanted it to be, but that doesn’t really
do much for God’s actual moral stance on polygamy as many of his
prophets had wives or concubines which are mentioned in the text itself.
You don’t even have to rely on assertions from other people living
around them and the preponderance of rumors and exposes to claim that
Solomon had some level of relationship with 1000 women, that’s just
included right in the text.

One need look no further than Deuteronomy 25 to see how women are
generally treated as property in Judaism passed from husband to brother
when the husband dies.

“5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child,
the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her
husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and
perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

6 And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in
the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of
Israel.”

Go back a couple of chapters to Deuteronomy 21 and you find an
interesting little tidbit about non-Israelite women taken as spoils of
war.

“10 When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy
God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive,

11 And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire
unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife;

12 Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave
her head, and pare her nails;

13 And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and
shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full
month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and
she shall be thy wife.

14 And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let
her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money,
thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her.”

A few things to point out:

First, are these warriors taking these female prisoners as wives only
after they divorce their first wife so as not to practice polygamy and
keep up with the morality sanctioned by Adam and Eve? That’s simply
absurd, warriors kept whatever they pillaged, including all the women.

Second, if you think that Israelite warriors saw a beautiful woman among
the captives and didn’t rape her on the spot, you don’t know how
barbaric warfare works. Famously, in the sacking of Carthage, women
threw themselves off buildings to keep themselves from suffering the
much worse fate surviving the destruction of the city. It may have
commanded these warriors in the Pentateuch to take women into their
homes and let them mourn the loss of their parents, children, husband,
pets and all for a month before raping them, but I have a feeling like
that part of this law wasn’t strictly adhered to.

Third, if the warrior takes her for a wife and finds out he doesn’t like
her, he can just let her go. A warrior couldn’t sell her because he’d
stolen her worth from the next man who would purchase her, but he could
cast her away like a soiled sock and let her assimilate into a society
of her enemies, where she would likely find work in a brothel for a few
years before a short and painful death to disease and abuse. Women
living in any war-prone society were and still are dealt a tough hand.
Please don’t think these religious teachings have gone anywhere. We may
be living in an enlightened society with the least global conflict the
world has ever seen, but the human behaviors the commandment explicitly
sanctions are a harsh every-day reality for women all over the world. We
aren’t past this phase as a species yet.

As we read before in the passage about polygamy in Judaism, there isn’t
an explicit commandment from Jesus outlawing or sanctioning polygamy.
The writings about Jesus’ teachings strike plenty of Jewish roots and
Jesus hearkens back to the Torah in a number of passages throughout the
gospels, but there is no explicit condemnation of polygamy. Some who
disagree with polygamy will trot out Matthew 19 where Jesus cites
Genesis and claim it says man and wife not man and wives, but that
passage is very explicit in what it’s addressing.

“3 Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for
a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”

4 “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator
‘made them male and
female,’\[[a](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=mat+19&version=NIV#fen-NIV-23767a)\] 5 and
said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be
united to his wife, and the two will become one
flesh’\[[b](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=mat+19&version=NIV#fen-NIV-23768b)\]? 6 So
they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined
together, let no one separate.”

7 “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a
certificate of divorce and send her away?”

8 Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your
hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. 9 I tell
you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and
marries another woman commits adultery.”

10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a
husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”

11 Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to
whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way,
and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are
those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of
heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”

The point of this passage was to discuss divorce. Jesus explicitly
condemns divorce unless a woman has sex with another man, in which case
it’s alright, but there’s still a gaping loophole for polygyny which
allows for men to marry multiple wives and cleave unto all of them and
become one flesh with every single one of them. I don’t quite see the
same loophole for polyandry because one woman marrying multiple men was
probably seen as adulterous in society, so Jesus didn’t explicitly
define those terms, but one man with multiple women, totally cool as
long as he can provide for them.

Once we get into the spread of Christianity, things become much more
historically documentable, but also significantly more confusing. This
is where the subject of polygamy and polyamory really ramps up.

Emperor Constantine the Great basically established Christianity as the
go-to religion in the Roman Empire. Thanks to the forgery of the
“Donation of Constantine,” the Pope was granted incredible powers in
the secular realm for governance over the rapidly decaying western Roman
Empire. A theologian who gained some power shortly after Constantine’s
death, Saint Augustine of Hippo, was viciously opposed to polygamy and
divorce, a perspective which slowly infected the western societies under
Catholic rule and became enshrined in the Catholic Catechism.

Saint Augustine wrote extensively on the sanctity of marriage and what
should and should not be approved by the church and the societies under
its rule. In his work finished around 401 CE titled “On the Good of
Marriage” we find passages like this:

“But I see not how the man can have permission to marry another, in case
he have left an adulteress, when
a [woman](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15687b.htm) has not to
be married to another, in case she have left an adulterer. And, this
being the case, so strong is that bond of fellowship
in married [persons](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/11726a.htm),
that, although it be tied for the sake of begetting children, not even
for the sake of begetting children is it loosed. For it is in
a man's power to put away a wife that is barren, and marry one of whom
to have children. And yet it is not allowed; and now indeed in our
times, and after the usage of Rome, neither to marry in addition, so as
to have more than one wife living: and, surely, in case of
an adulteress or adulterer being left, it would be possible that
more men should be born, if either
the [woman](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15687b.htm) were married to
another, or the man should marry another.” Ch. 7

“Clearly with the good will of the wife to take
another [woman](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15687b.htm), that from
her may be born sons common to both, by the sexual intercourse and seed
of the one, but by the right and power of the other, was lawful among
the ancient fathers: whether it be lawful now also, I would not hastily
pronounce. For there is not now necessity of begetting children, as
there then was, when, even when wives bare children, it was allowed, in
order to a more numerous posterity, to marry other wives in addition,
which now is certainly not lawful.” Ch. 17
<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/1309.htm>

One group Saint Augustine mentioned by name were known as the Adamites,
or the Adamians. They cropped up in Northern Africa and practiced a form
of early proto-Christianity wherein they claimed to have regained Adam’s
primeval innocence. Most of what we know of this sect was written by
early Catholic historiographers and they present a culture of utter
lawlessness. Best we can tell, the Adamites practiced free-love and
rejected the institution of marriage all together, while communing with
God in holy nudism and holding all property in common.

By the early 400s the early Catholic church had utterly smashed this
little outcropping of Adamic hippies and they were essentially lost to
history for nearly a millennium with some evidence they had brief
revivals at various points leading up to a major restoration in the
13<sup>th</sup> century in the Netherlands under the name of the
Brethren of the Free Spirit and the Taborites in Bohemia and the
Beghards in Germany right before the Protestant Reformation. Every time
these little free-love sparks would strike some kindling, the fires of
passion were quickly snuffed out by the Catholic authorities in the
area, a formula which would strike a familiar tone throughout every
society controlled by Catholic authoritarianism.

As Christianity spread under the umbrella of Catholicism, more and more
societies which were previously polygamous began converting to monogamy
as the status quo with polygamy being practiced as an exception to the
rule. As more generations were born into societies where polygamy was
slowly being phased out, monogamy began to gain a significant foothold
in western cultures throughout all of what we call the dark ages or the
medieval period of European history. We’ll spare deconstructing marriage
culture throughout this time because it covers so many disparate times
and geographies separating so many different cultures, most of which
were absorbed into the Roman Catholic empire which was staunchly opposed
to polygamy in most areas at most times.

These free-love Christian groups would heavily influence the Christians
of the Moravian church or the Unitas Fratrum, the Unity of Brethren. The
Wesley brothers would come into contact with a German Moravian named
Peter Bohler around 1736 and would subsequently have incredible
spiritual experiences in various tavern meetings and gatherings on
Oxford campus, coming to be known as the “Holy Club”. The Wesley
brothers would create their own religion in the wake of the Holy Club
disbanding which came to be known as Methodism. This would slowly spread
to America in the 1760s, which had profound Protestant impacts on the
burgeoning populations in the colonies.

That was a bit of a fast-forward, to what we’ll discuss in the
Protestant Reformation. Before getting ahead of ourselves, let’s discuss
polygamy in a culture and belief system which has historically been very
friendly to polygamy, Islam. Islam, like every other religion, is a
product of its time and the society from whence it arose. The founding
prophet of Islam, Muhammed, was a rampant polygamist and we can learn
some interesting things about ancient Islamic culture through viewing
the circumstances surrounding his multiple marriages.

For starters, the Quran permits and even tacitly commands Muslims to
practice polygamy. In Surah 4 titled an-Nisaa known as the women’s surah
named after one of the prophet’s wives, we find passages such as this
relating to what Allah sees as legitimate marriage, and I’m reading this
from the Sahih international translation, you’ll find a link to Surah 4
in the show notes.

“3 And if you fear that you will not deal justly with the orphan girls,
then marry those that please you of \[other\] women, two or three or
four. But if you fear that you will not be just, then \[marry only\] one
or those your right hand possesses. That is more suitable that you may
not incline \[to injustice\].”

## 25 And whoever among you cannot \[find\] the means to marry free, believing women, then \[he may marry\] from those whom your right hands possess of believing slave girls. And Allah is most knowing about your faith. You \[believers\] are of one another. So marry them with the permission of their people and give them their due compensation according to what is acceptable.

## 34 Men are in charge of women by \[right of\] what Allah has given one over the other and what they spend \[for maintenance\] from their wealth. So righteous women are devoutly obedient, guarding in \[the husband's\] absence what Allah would have them guard. But those \[wives\] from whom you fear arrogance - \[first\] advise them; \[then if they persist\], forsake them in bed; and \[finally\], strike them. But if they obey you \[once more\], seek no means against them. Indeed, Allah is ever Exalted and Grand.

## 129 And you will never be able to be equal \[in feeling\] between wives, even if you should strive \[to do so\]. So do not incline completely \[toward one\] and leave another hanging. And if you amend \[your affairs\] and fear Allah - then indeed, Allah is ever Forgiving and Merciful.”

## I found an interesting article about Polygamy in Islam hosted on al-islam.org and I’ll simply quote from it to discuss a moderate and nuanced stance on polygamy, after which I’ll quote later passages from the same article in dealing with Muhammed’s many wives.

## Based on such verses, certain Muslim governments (like Iran and Egypt) regulate the provision of polygyny: the person who intends to marry a second wife has to seek approval from the family court and prove the need for a second wife and the ability of providing for both in an adequate manner.  
   
Islam is a practical religion; its laws are in line with human nature. It does not deny the natural forces in humans, rather it confronts them and provides guidance to control them without disrupting the peace in society.  
   
Almost all Western governments have forbidden polygamy; but adultery is most rampant in these very countries. In spite of all attempts to promote monogamous relationships, many married men have mistresses or are involved in extra-marital affairs resulting in higher divorce rates, broken families and children growing up without fathers. And such kind of behaviour has also touched the highest offices —religious as well as secular— of the United States of America.  
   
If a man wants to fool around, Islam will hold him responsible and tie him down to duties towards that “second wife” and her children. Ira Lurvey, of the Family Law section of American Bar Association said, “We are going from monogamy to something called serial monogamy and we have no rules and guidelines; we’re groping in the dark for how to conduct our lives”.   
Well, in Islam, you do not need to grope in the dark; Islam has given clear guidelines on all kinds of relationships: monogamy to polygamy.”

## Of course, it’s well known that Muhammed took multiple wives, and each of his ten wives are explained in this same article. It lists that Muhammed remained unmarried for the first 25 years of his life, then from 25 to 50 had his first wife, Khadija. But once he hits 50, he marries ten more wives in 13 years. There’s no way to know of Muhammed’s other relations beyond these wives as warlords like him were often wont to have sex with many women without marrying them, and there’s also no way to know just how many women he raped in his many military conquests. Muslim apologists will claim that Muhammed only had relations with the women he married as all good prophets do, but there is simply no evidence to substantiate such an astonishing claim. Muhammed was a wealthy man and took the spoils of war to add to his many possessions, including women. People will also claim that his youngest wife, Lady Aisha, was merely 9 years old when he married her, but he waited until she was of age to have sex with her. There is a hot dispute in Muslim circles about her actual age at the time of marriage and I don’t know if there’s any way to truly substantiate whether or not she was 9 years old when he married her, however, the article from which I’m taking a lot of this polygamy in Islam information puts her age at 18 when they married. It is clearly written by an Islam apologist who is uncomfortable with the founding prophet of Islam being a pedophile.

## Needless to say, the majority of Muhammed’s subsequent marriages were done for political purposes to make peace or business transactions with other tribes. Others, like Lady Umm Habibah, were taken in as Muhammed’s wife because their families were opposed to Islam and these wives were loyal to the prophet, justifying said marriage. Another wife, Lady Safiyyah was taken as a prisoner after the battle of Khaybar and was joined to Muhammed as a wife, thus keeping in line with the Abrahamic tradition of taking women as property from the spoils of war.

## It wouldn’t be until the 20<sup>th</sup> century when largely Muslim countries would begin to outlaw or restrict polygyny. From the Polygyny in Islam wiki page, much of which was taken from Sumbul Ali-Karamali in her 2008 article “The Muslim Next Door”:

### Countries that ban polygyny:

[Turkey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turkey) was the first Muslim
country to legally ban polygyny in 1926. This decision was not based on
religious reasons, but rather was an entirely secular
ban. [Tunisia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tunisia) was the next
country to ban polygyny through legislation passed in 1956 and restated
in 1964. Unlike Turkey, Tunisia banned polygyny on religious grounds,
citing two main reasons. First,
the [Quran](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quran) limited the practice
of polygyny, thus it did not support the practice and clearly intended
for the practice to be eliminated over time. Second, the Quran demands
equal treatment of all wives in a polygynous marriage, which is
impossible, thus making the practice
illegal. Finally, [Israel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israel) banned
polygyny as well by 1978.

### Countries that restrict polygyny

The following countries restrict the practice of polygyny:

  - > [Egypt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egypt) (1920)

  - > [Sudan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudan) (1929)

  - > [India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India) (1939)

  - > [Algeria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algeria)

  - > [Jordan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jordan) (1951)

  - > [Syria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syria) (1953)

  - > [Morocco](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morocco) (1958)

  - > [Bangladesh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangladesh)

  - > [Iraq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq) (1959)

  - > [Iran](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iran) (1967, 1975)

  - > [Kuwait](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kuwait)

  - > [Lebanon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebanon)

Some countries, including India, Iran, Iraq, Bangladesh, Algeria,
Lebanon, Morocco, Jordan, and Kuwait, allow women to include a clause
prohibiting polygyny in marriage contracts. Other countries, such as
Iran and Pakistan, require that a man get permission to take a second
wife from his first wife, and then show the court proof of his first
wife's consent. Finally, countries such as Malaysia state that a man
must get permission from both his wife and from the governmental
religious authority in order to take a second.

Although many countries have laws restricting or banning polygyny, it is
still practiced illegally. It is difficult to enforce anti-polygyny laws
and restrictions in countries with large rural populations. Furthermore,
illegal polygyny often occurs in countries with poor social services as
women rely on husbands to support them in these situations.”

It’s worth noting that these restrictions were put in place for a
reason, because polygamy was the status quo. If there’s one central
point to take away from everything we’re discussing is that polygamy
used to be far more prevalent than it is today. Polygamy was the
de-facto societal norm, monogamy is the new kid on the block
historically speaking. It’s tough to attribute the
20<sup>th</sup>-century attack on polygamy to one thing, but it may have
been due to the influx of globalization with the advent air travel.
Prior to the 20<sup>th</sup> century, it was hard to know what society
was like on the other side of the globe, making it a challenge to impose
one society’s morals on another if they weren’t geographically adjacent.
Once people were able to quickly travel the world and mingle with people
in other societies, it became much easier to understand differences in
society and push change one way or another.

At the risk of sounding conspiratorial, one thing worth pointing out is
the kind of people who were first able to travel over air, the wealthy
in western societies, which were largely dominated by Christian ideals
of monogamy being the superior family structure. Once wealthy Christians
could travel to new worlds quickly and mingle with the wealthy elites of
other societies, it’s understandable that a healthy exchange of ideas
would occur in casual conversation. I’ll spare using names in lieu of
creating a purely hypothetical situation, but picture this if you will
and please suspend writing it off as conspiracy theory rationale and
therefore invalid.

A wealthy monogamous Christian hops on a plane in the 1950s and travels
to third-world Iraq or Bangladesh, or whatever largely Muslim country
where polygyny was the status quo for the wealthiest in society. This
Christian meets with other affluent individuals in this society worlds
apart from the Western society they left and sees polygyny in practice.
They see polygamy in general to be anathema to God’s will so they either
speak up about it and share their ideas with the other people with whom
they’re mingling, or they return home to their western society and
report what they saw. Their other monogamous Christian friends now know
that other societies are practicing what they see as an abomination and
they all seek to take actions to push legal restrictions on marriage
practices in these other countries. It sounds conspiratorial when we
ascribe malice to the wealthy Christians who can afford air travel to
proselyte to other societies, but if we remove malice and view it merely
as spreading ideas they consider to be righteous, it changes from being
conspiracy to simply logical. Once you add up the millions of people
able to quickly travel and the billions of small conversations with
other affluent people they’ve had over the past 100 years, one would be
strained to claim there has been no societal impact on largely
polygamous societies. I would simply argue that the influx of
regulations outlawing polygamy in cultures where it was viewed as
standard practice or not immoral in the 20<sup>th</sup> and
21<sup>st</sup> centuries is the product of this massive Christian
proselyting against polygamy on a world-wide scale.

The point I’m driving towards is that Christianity didn’t reserve its
fight against polygamy to the 20<sup>th</sup> century. Powerful versions
of Christianity have been putting their thumb on the scale in favor of
monogamy since the rise of Catholic political power.

When we view small societies practicing polygamy after the protestant
reformation, we can see that one of the primary issues the Catholic
church has taken with these societies is their liberal stance on
marriage. Prior to the Protestant reformation, Catholicism had
controlled who could and couldn’t marry as well as all divorce
proceedings in the Western world.

Our examination of polygamous societies now leads us to discussing a
number of small free-thinking Christian societies which cropped up out
of the Protestant reformation.

We begin with the forefather of the reformation, Martin Luther. On 13
January 1524, Martin Luther wrote a letter to Chancellor Gregory Bruck
which has become the hallmark Luther stance on polygamy. The historical
issue with this letter is it was given in reply to a petition asking
Luther about the divinity of taking another wife when a man’s wife was
unable to bear him children. Essentially, a man’s wife couldn’t have sex
with him because of some unknown illness and Luther’s colleague,
Carlstadt, gave broad license to the man to practice bigamy for the
purpose of bearing children. Luther weighed in with his scriptural
analysis with this passage in his letter.

“I, for my part, admit I can raise no objection if a man wishes to take
several wives since Holy Scripture does not forbid this; but I should
not like to see this example introduced amongst Christians. ... It does
not beseem Christians to seize greedily and for their own advantage on
every thing to which their freedom gives them a right. . . . No
Christian surely is so God-forsaken as not to be able to practice
continence when his partner, owing to the Divine dispensation, proves
unfit for matrimony. Still, we may well let things take their course"

An alternate translation sheds a bit more light on Luther’s stance. You
can find an article in the show notes discussing the historical context
for this letter exchange as well as a number of other Luther quotes
wherein he tacitly approves of but disagrees with the utility of
polygamy.

“The prince ought to ask the bigamist, 'Have you obeyed your conscience
directed by God's word?' If he replies: 'It is by Carlstadt,' or some
other, the prince has nothing more to object; for he has no right to
disquiet or hush the inward voice of that man, or decide in a matter
entirely within the jurisdiction of him who, according to Zacharias, is
commissioned to explain the divine law. For my part, I confess that I do
not see how I can prevent polygamy; there is not in the sacred texts the
least word against those who take several wives at one time; but there
are many things permissible that ought not becomingly to be done: of
these is bigamy”

Martin Luther was but one example of theologians leading into the
enlightenment with softened stances on marriage and polygamy. He was a
bible scholar, he had to be in order to translate the first people’s
bible not controlled by the Catholic church, so he knew the bible
through and through and he was right when he said that holy scripture
does not forbid polygamy. It seems as if he understood the implications
of polygamy and how society treated women in polygynous relationships,
so with the alternate translation when he said “but there are many
things permissible that ought not becomingly to be done” meaning bigamy
or polygamy, it was a nuanced perspective.

That being said, I have to point out the world from whence the
Protestant Reformation rose. Europe was dominated by Catholicism which
was strictly monogamous. To say this cultural bias didn’t factor into
Luther’s nuanced perspective would be arbitrary and fallacious.
Everything Luther wrote was in response to society under Catholic
control, before the reformation he was an Augustinian friar and we know
Saint Augustine’s stance on marriage was nothing but vitriol against
polygamy. Luther couldn’t find any scriptural reference condemning
polygamy, but his society all around was strictly monogamous, so he
would be hard-pressed to see a successful society which did practice
polygamy. We have to parse out these biases.

In the heat of the Protestant reformation a mere 300 Km from Luther’s
birth and death place came the Munster Rebellion. The Munster Rebellion
came in opposition to the recently emplaced Lutheran magistrates who
governed the city of Westphalia. Bernard Rothmann and Bernard
Knipperdolling published anti-Catholicism pamphlets seen as radical even
by Lutheran standards which called for communalism and redistribution of
wealth. One of the chief ways the leadership of the Munster Rebellion
gained female followers was due to their proselyting tactics. They would
actively seek out Catholic convents and nunneries preaching free-love
and communalism to them, appealing to their carnal natures of sex drive
and resource hunger, and these people would convert to the radical new
form of Protestantism and move to Munster to live among the others in
the rebel cause. After the initial siege of the city in April of 1534,
Jon Matthys, the leader of the cause, was killed, beheaded, and his
genitals were reportedly nailed to the city gate. His successor, Jon Van
Leiden, claimed to receive a revelation from God which deemed him the
rightful successor to the rebel cause and he quickly instated the
widespread practice of polygamy.

Some reports claim there were as much as three times as many women as
men in Munster at this time. I don’t know if there’s any way to
substantiate that claim as it seems to be a frequent justification for
polygamy regardless of truthfulness, but Jon Van Leiden subsequently
took 16 wives for himself. In spite of their claims of fairness and
communal property, it was primarily just the religious elites who were
able to practice polygamy having the resources to sustain multiple
marriages. In summer of 1535 the city fell to Catholic resistance and
Jon van Leiden and two Bernards were executed, but not before they were
hoisted up in small cages for the whole city to see in the steeple of
St. Lambert’s church.

The Catholic opposition to the Munster rebellion shouldn’t be ascribed
to polygamy alone. The leaders of the rebellion were heavily reliant on
personal revelation based on biblical principles, which inevitably
amounts to a decline in power and influence by the largest institution
which claimed to be God’s emissaries. When a Pope claims to speak for
God and another group of people come along saying they speak for God as
well, that’s a threat to the overpowering Catholic power dynamic which
was already threatened with the rise of the Protestant Reformation in
its infancy.

The Munster rebellion sparked a fire set to consume Catholic control
over the rest of Europe as the enlightenment slowly gained a foothold.
In a world decreasingly controlled by Catholic religious dicta,
free-thinking and philosophy could flourish with only marginal
limitation.

John Dee was one of the enlightenment’s greatest philologists and
students of a wide plethora of schools of study. Once he graduated from
Cambridge in 1546 Dee began a tireless study of everything from
mathematics and astrology to botany and alchemy. He served as personal
advisor to Queen Elizabeth I who had been imprisoned for being a
supporter of Protestantism and the Protestant rebel cause.

John Dee purportedly had the largest library of any institution in
England and was known as one of the smartest people alive in his day. He
would spend hours upon hours investigating practical as well as
spiritual alchemy and many other occult practices and in 1582 he teamed
up with a man by the name of Edward Kelley and began frequent bouts of
drug induced spiritual pursuits of knowledge. Edward Kelley was adept in
the use of seer-stones to hunt for buried treasure and had a terrible
reputation as a counterfeiter. Throughout these various seances, Edward
Kelley was known as John Dee’s personal prophet or seer and they spent
much of their time attempting to translate the Enochian language which
was channeled through Kelley. Modernly we would call this a drug induced
glossolalia to which Dee was trying to translate into English or Latin.
During one of their seances, Kelley gave Dee a divine revelation that
they should share all their possessions in common, including their
wives. This had a few profound impacts. Dee was rather wealthy, not
necessarily in liquid cash, but in possessions. His library was full of
valuable books and trinkets acquired from all over the world. Dee also
had a nice 23-year-old wife. She bore a son, thought to be Kelleys,
which John Dee raised as his own. Kelley and Dee parted ways soon after
the son’s birth.

The reason Edward Kelley and John Dee are relevant is Dee was basically
the foremost scholar on Occult practices and the Enochian language,
which Joseph Smith would emulate in his own way. These people and other
students of similar philosophies Joseph likely revered for their
research into alchemy and occultism. When your heroes practice
wife-swapping and free-love, it’s hard not to see it as acceptable or
even divinely inspired, regardless of the need to keep it underground
because monogamy had become the only legally sanctioned form of
marriage.

Monogamy has become the status quo throughout the western world over the
past 1800 years, but it hasn’t been without its detractors. Free-love,
wife-swapping, nudist, polygamous, and all kinds of communities have
existed in small samples, seemingly erupting spontaneously out of an
inhospitable world dominated by a single genre of religion which would
prefer to see monogamy flourish, and go to great length to suppress or
silence these small groups.

With the advent of the printing press and these communities cropping up
everywhere throughout Europe and America, the previous stranglehold the
Catholic church and other orthodox Protestant Christian sects had on
monogamy and their ability to suppress these groups quickly waned. With
the increased prevalence of the enlightenment infecting societies,
feminist and free-love writers and poets like William Blake emerged,
repeatedly condemning marriage as a form of slavery.

What is the most moral form of marriage? The answer to that question
seems wholly dependent on the specific religious beliefs of a specific
demographic, so maybe there is no actual answer. There was a study
recently published in the March 2011 Journal of Evolution and Human
Behavior which examined the utility of polygamy vs. monogamy,
specifically assessing which form of marriage is more successful in
raising offspring. That has always been a go-to argument for justifying
polygamy, to raise up seed unto this generation so the study took a hard
look at the data and the findings are interesting, but not surprising
when you think about it.

Here’s a few extracts from an article covering the study on
LiveScience.com

“Mormons make an excellent test case for evolutionary biologists for two
reasons, Wade said. First, they keep precise genealogical records.
Second, Mormons are a rare example of a group of people who changed
their mating practices. In 1862, Congress made polygamy illegal in U.S.
territories, including the Mormon stronghold of Utah. In 1890, the
Mormon church issued a declaration ending the practice. Of married Utah
men born in 1833, almost 18 percent had multiple wives, Wade and his
colleagues estimate. By a few decades later, less than 1 percent of
married men were in polygamous relationships.

"Here with this single population there's a change, an externally driven
change, in the system of mating from polygamous
to [monogamous](https://www.livescience.com/10433-young-adults-monogamy-complicated.html),"
Wade said. "And even better, nothing else changes. They don't change
their lifestyle, they don't change what they eat, or where they live."

The researchers decided to find out how the change affected the
evolutionary pressures on Mormon men and women, particularly [sexual
selection](https://www.livescience.com/5066-peacocks-colorful-tails.html),
in which there is competition between males (or females) to win a mate.
It's this pressure that explains a male peacock's glitzy tail. Polygamy
exacerbates such sexual selection. After all, for every man with five
wives, there are four men with no wives at all. Thus, the multiple-wife
system separates men into those with huge amounts of offspring and those
with no children at all.”

“Unsurprisingly, the men who acquired lots of wives also produced more
children. For each additional spouse, a man could expect about six more
kids. Each wife in the relationship could expect to produce an average
of one fewer child for every additional wife.

When polygamy was outlawed, the reproductive gap between successful
polygamous men and wife-less singletons plummeted by 58 percent, the
researchers found.

"If you only have one partner, the maximum \[number of offspring\] for
the male is going to be the same as the maximum for the females," Wade
said. So the end of polygamy brought the genders into line, he said.
"The variation from one male to the next with monogamy becomes almost
equal to the variation from one woman to the next with monogamy."

So, this study seemed to point out that monogamy is more successful at
raising more children, an unsurprising finding in my opinion. If you
have one man who’s supporting 10 wives and 30 children, chances are they
will be less successful that 10 men supporting 10 wives with 3 children
each, making it more possible for each family to raise more than 3
children. It also widens the sample of genes included in the community
gene pool, which increases likelihood of reproductive success. If
raising more offspring is more moral, than monogamy is the more moral
system of marriage. However, considering the vast overpopulation of the
planet already, I would argue that raising more children in a world with
millions or possibly billions of people starved for resources is an
incredibly immoral thing to do, making polygamy the more moral form of
marriage when only considering the single metric of number of offspring.

There are so many ways to cut marriage and morality. This has only been
an analysis of what is and has been, not what ought to be, because I
don’t think there’s a solid and concise answer to that great question:
“What is the most moral form of marriage?”. To wrap things up for us
today, I hope you’ll permit me a reading of William Blake’s Visions of
the Daughters of Albion.

### The Argument  
I loved Theotormon  
And I was not ashamed  
I trembled in my virgin fears  
And I hid in Leutha's Vale\!  
  
I plucked Leutha's flower,  
And I rose up from the vale;  
But the terrible thunders tore  
My virgin mantle in twain.  
  
Visions  
Enslav'd, the Daughters of [Albion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albion_\(Blake\)) weep; a trembling lamentation  
Upon their mountains; in their valleys, sighs towards America.  
For the soft soul of America, Oothoon wanderd in woe,  
Along the vales of Leutha seeking flowers to comfort her;  
And thus she spoke to the bright Marygold of Leutha's vale  
  
Art thou a flower\! art though a nymph\! I see thee now a flower;  
Now a nymph\! I dare not pluck thee from thy dewy bed\!  
  
The Golden nymph replied; pluck thou my flower Oothoon the mild  
Another flower shall spring. because the soul of sweet delight  
Can never pass away, she ceas'd & closed her golden shrine.  
  
Then Oothoon pluck'd the flower saying, I pluck thee from thy bed  
Sweet flower. and put thee here to glow between my breasts  
And thus I turn to where my whole soul seeks.  
  
Over the waves she went in wing'd exulting swift delight;  
And over Theotormon's reign, took her impetuous course.  
  
Bromion rent her with his thunders. on his stormy bed  
Lay the faint maid, and soon her woes apalld his thunders hoarse  
  
Bromion spoke. behold this harlot here on Bromions bed.  
And let the jealous dolphins sport around the lovely maid:  
Thy soft American plains are mine, and mine thy north & south:  
Stampt with my signet are the swarthy children of the sun;  
They are obedient, they resist not, they obey the scourge:  
Their daughters worship terrors and obey the violent:  
Now thou maist marry Bromions harlot, and protect the child  
Of Bromions rage, that Oothoon shall put forth in nine moons time  
Then storms rent Theotormons limbs; he rolld his waves around.  
And folded his black jealous waters round the adulterate pair  
Bound back to back in Bromions caves terror & meekness dwell  
  
At entrance Theotormon sits wearing the threshold hard  
With secret tears; beneath him sound like waves on a desart shore  
The voice of slaves beneath the sun, and children bought with money,  
That shiver in religious caves beneath the burning fores  
Of lust, that belch incessant from the summits of the earth  
  
Oothoon weeps not. she cannot weep\! her tears are locked up;  
But she can howl incessant writhing her soft snowy limbs.  
And calling Theotormons Eagles to prey upon her flesh.  
  
I call with holy voice\! kings of the sounding air,  
Rend away this defiled bosom that I may reflect,  
The image of Theotormon on my pure transparent breast.  
  
The Eagles at her call descend & rend their bleeding prey;  
Theotormon severely smiles. Her soul reflects the smile;  
As the clear spring muddled with feet of beasts grows pure & smiles  
  
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.  
  
Why does Theotormon sit weeping upon the threshold:  
And Oothoon hovers by his side, perswading him in vain:  
I cry arise O Theotormon for the village dog  
Barks at the breaking day. the nightingale has done lamenting  
The lark does rustle in the ripe corn, and the Eagle returns  
From nightly prey, and lifts his golden beak to the pure east;  
Shaking the dust from his immortal points to awake  
The sun that sleeps too long. Arise my Theotormon I am pure.  
Because the night is gone that closed me in its deadly black.  
They told me that the night & day were all that I could see;  
They told me that I had five senses to inclose me up.  
And they inclos'd my infinite brain into a narrow circle,  
And sunk my heart into the Abyss, a red round globe hot burning  
Till all from life I was obliterated and erased.  
Instead of morn arises a bright shadow, like an eye  
In the eastern cloud: instead of night a sickly charnel house;  
That Theotormon hears me not\! to him the night and morn  
Are both alike: A night of sighs, a morning of fresh tears;  
And none but Bromion can hear my lamentations.  
  
With what sense is it that the chicken shuns the ravenous hawk?  
With what sense does the tame pigeon measure out the expanse?  
With what sense does the bee form cells? have not the mouse & frog  
Eyes and ears and sense of touch? yet are their habitations.  
And their pursuits, as different as their forms and as their joys:  
Ask the wild ass why he refuses burdens: and the meek camel  
Why he loves man: is it because of eye ear mouth or skin  
Or breathing nostrils? No, for these the wolf and tyger have.  
Ask the blind worm the secrets of the grave, and why her spires  
Love to curl round the bones of death\! and ask the rav'nous snake  
Where she gets poison: & the wing'd eagle why he loves the sun  
And then tell me the thoughts of man, which have been hid of old.  
  
Silent I hover all the night, and all day could be silent,  
If Theotormon once would turn his loved eyes upon me;  
How can I be defild when I reflect my image pure?  
Sweetest the fruit that the worms feeds on. & the soul prey'd on by woe,  
The new wash'd lamb ting'd with the village smoke & the bright swan  
By the red earth of our immortal river: I bathe my wings,  
And I am white and pure to hover round Theotormons breast.  
  
Then Theotormon broke his silence, and he answered.  
Tell me what is the night or day to one o'erflowd with woe?  
Tell me what is a thought? & of what substance is it made?  
Tell me what is a joy? & in what gardens do joys grow?  
And in what rivers swim the sorrows? and upon what mountains  
Wave shadows of discontent? and in what houses dwell the wretched  
Drunken with a woe forgotten. and shut up from cold despair,  
  
Tell me where dwell the thoughts forgotten till thou call them forth  
Tell me where dwell the joys of old\! & where the ancient loves?  
And when will they renew again & the night of oblivion past?  
That I might traverse times and spaces far remote and bring  
Comforts into a pre\[s\]ent sorrow and a night of pain  
Where goest thou O thought\! to what remote land is thy flight?  
If thou returnest to the present moment of affliction  
Wilt thou bring comforts on thy wings, and dews and honey and balm;  
Or poison from the desart wilds, from the eyes of the envier.  
  
Then Bromion said: and shook the cavern with his lamentation  
  
Thou knowest that the ancient trees seen by thy eyes have fruit;  
But knowest thou that trees and fruit flourish upon the earth  
To gratify senses unknown? trees beasts and birds unknown:  
Unknown, not unperceived, spread in the infinite microscope,  
In places yet unvisited by the voyager. and in worlds  
Over another kind of seas, and in atmospheres unknown.  
Ah\! are there other wars, beside the wars of sword and fire\!  
And are there other sorrows, beside the sorrows of poverty?  
And are there other joys, beside the joys of riches and ease?  
And is there not one law for both the lion and the ox?  
And is there not eternal fire, and eternal chains?  
To bind the phantoms of existence from eternal life?  
  
Then Oothoon waited silent all the day, and all the night,  
But when the morn arose, her lamentation renewd,  
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.  
  
O Urizen\! Creator of men\! mistaken Demon of heaven;  
Thy joys are tears\! thy labour vain, to form men to thine image.  
How can one absorb another? are not different joys  
Holy, eternal, infinite\! and each joy is a Love.  
  
Does not the great mouth laugh at a gift? & the narrow eyelids mock  
At the labour that is above payment, and wilt thou take the ape  
For thy councellor? or the dog. for a schoolmaster to thy children?  
Does he who contemns poverty, and he who turns with abhorrence  
From usury: feel the same passion or are they moved alike?  
How can the giver of gifts experience the delights of the merchant?  
How the industrious citizen the pains of the husbandman.  
How different far the fat fed hireling with hollow drum;  
Who buys whole corn fields into wastes, and sings upon the heath:  
How different their eye and ear\! how different the world to them\!  
With what sense does the parson claim the labour of the farmer?  
What are his nets & gins & traps, & how does he surround him  
With cold floods of abstraction, and with forests of solitude,  
To build him castles and high spires, where kings & priests may dwell.  
Till she who burns with youth, and knows no fixed lot; is bound  
In spells of law to one she loaths: and must she drag the chain  
Of life, in weary lust\! must chilling murderous thoughts, obscure  
The clear heaven of her eternal spring\! to bear the wintry rage  
Of a harsh terror driv'n to madness, bound to hold a rod  
Over her shrinking shoulders all the day; and all the night  
To turn the wheel of false desire: and longings that wake her womb  
To the abhorred birth of cherubs in the human form  
That live a pestilence & die a meteor & are no more.  
Till the child dwell with one he hates, and do all the deeds he loaths  
And the impure scourge force his seed into its unripe birth  
E'er yet his eyelids can behold the arrows of the day.  
Does the whale worship at thy footsteps as the hungry dog?  
Or does he scent the mountain prey, because his nostrils wide  
Draw in the ocean? does his eye discern the flying cloud  
As the ravens eye? or does he measure the expanse like the vulture?  
Does the still spider view the cliffs where eagles hide their young?  
Or does the fly rejoice, because the harvest is brought in?  
Does not the eagle scorn the earth & despise the treasures beneath?  
But the mole knoweth what is there, & the worm shall tell it thee.  
Does not the worm erect a pillar in the mouldering church yard?  
And a palace of eternity in the jaws of the hungry grave  
Over his porch these words are written. Take thy bliss O Man\!  
And sweet shall be thy taste & sweet thy infant joys renew\!  
  
Infancy, fearless, lustful, happy\! nestling for delight  
In laps of pleasure; Innocence\! honest, open, seeking  
The vigorous joys of morning light; open to virgin bliss.  
Who taught thee modesty, subtil modesty\! child of night & sleep  
When thou awakest. wilt thou dissemble all thy secret joys  
Or wert thou not awake when all this mystery was disclos'd\!  
Then com'st thou forth a modest virgin knowing to dissemble  
With nets found under thy night pillow, to catch virgin joy,  
And brand it with the name of whore: & sell it in the night,  
In silence, ev'n without a whisper, and in seeming sleep,  
Religious dream and holy vespers, light thy smoky fires:  
Once were thy fires lighted by the eyes of honest morn  
And does my Theotormon seek this hypocrite modesty\!  
This knowing, artful, secret. fearful, cautious, trembling hypocrite.  
Then is Oothoon a whore indeed\! and all the virgin joys  
Of life are harlots: and Theotormon is a sick mans dream  
And Oothoon is the crafty slave of selfish holiness.  
  
But Oothoon is not so, a virgin fill'd with virgin fancies  
Open to joy and to delight where ever beauty appears  
If in the morning sun I find it; there my eyes are fix'd  
In happy copulation; if in evening mild, wearied with work;  
Sit on a bank and draw the pleasures of this free born joy.  
  
The moment of desire\! the moment of desire\! The virgin  
That pines for man; shall awaken her womb to enormous joys  
In the secret shadows of her chamber; the youth shut up from  
The lustful joy, shall forget to generate, & create an amorous image  
In the shadows of his curtains and in the folds of his silent pillow.  
Are not these the places of religion? the rewards of continence\!  
The self enjoyings of self denial? Why dost thou seek religion?  
Is it because acts are not lovely, that thou seekest solitude,  
Where the horrible darkness is impressed with reflections of desire.  
  
Father of Jealousy, be thou accursed from the earth\!  
Why hast thou taught my Theotormon this accursed thing?  
Till beauty fades from off my shoulders darken'd and cast out,  
A solitary shadow wailing on the margin of non-entity.  
  
I cry, Love\! Love\! Love\! happy happy Love\! free as the mountain wind\!  
Can that be Love, that drinks another as a sponge drinks water?  
That clouds with jealousy his nights, with weepings all the day:  
To spin a web of age around him, grey and hoary\! dark\!  
Till his eyes sicken at the fruit that hangs before his sight.  
Such is self-love that envies all\! a creeping skeleton  
With lamplike eyes watching around the frozen marriage bed.  
  
But silken nets and traps of adamant will Oothoon spread,  
And catch for the girls of mild silver, or of furious gold;  
I'll lie beside thee on a bank & view their wanton play  
In lovely copulation bliss on bliss with Theotormon;  
Red as the rosy morning, lustful as the first born beam,  
Oothoon shall view his dear delight, nor e'er with jealous cloud  
Come in the heavens of generous love; nor selfish blightings bring.  
  
Does the sun walk in glorious raiment, on the secret floor  
Where the cold miser spreads his gold? or does the bright cloud drop  
On his stone threshold? does his eye behold the beam that brings  
Expansion to the eye of pity? or will he bind himself  
Beside the ox to thy hard furrow? does not that mild beam blot  
The bat, the owl, the glowing tyger, and the king of night.  
The sea fowl takes the wintry blast. for a cov'ring to her limbs:  
And the wild snake, the pestilence to adorn him with gems & gold.  
And trees. & birds. & beasts, & men. behold their eternal joy.  
Arise you little glancing wings, and sing your infant joy\!  
Arise and drink your bliss. For everything that lives is holy\!  
  
Thus every morning wails Oothoon. but Theotormon sits  
Upon the margind ocean conversing with shadows dire,  
  
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.

The End

###
