---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 60 – CC Smith Entheogen Theory pt2'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-60-cc-smith-entheogen-theory-pt2
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-60-cc-smith-entheogen-theory-pt2
category: History
date: 2017-07-26 06:28:34 +0000
---

Ep 60 -- CC Smith Entheogen Theory pt2

On this episode, we continue our conversation with Cody Noconi from the
Psilly Rabbits podcast about the Smith-entheogen theory. We cover the
second half of the paper to be presented at Sunstone Symposium which
deconstructs entheogen use through Joseph Smith's early years and into
Mormonism. The amount Smith had practiced honing dose, set, and setting
finally pays off during the Kirtland Temple dedication ceremony. Public
entheogen use seems to drop off sharply after this ceremony, being
forced underground for many understandable reasons. We conclude with
discussing possible weak points in the theory, as well as limitations,
and finish with our overarching conclusion for the entire paper. We hope
to see some of you at Sunstone on Saturday 29 July 2017 for the
presentation, or for the live My Book of Mormon show at Squatter's pub
that same evening! If you can't make it to either of those, consider
coming to church with Marie and I at the Joseph Smith Memorial building
on Sunday to stand in solidarity supporting those hurt by the bigotry
forwarded by the Mormon church.

Links:\
\
Smith-Entheogen theory\
[http://realbookofmormon.org/smithentheogentheory](http://realbookofmormon.org/smithentheogentheory/)

Psilly Rabbits Podcast\
<http://psillyrabbits.com/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Intro 7/25/17

This is part 2 of the special clean-cut edition of the Smith-entheogen
theory where we invite my research partner, Cody Noconi, to join us in
reading through the paper we're presenting at Sunstone on July 29^th^,
2017. If you missed part 1, I would strongly recommend going back and
giving it a listen as it's a necessary primer to what we discuss in this
episode.

You may have noticed that this episode is coming out on Tuesday as
opposed to Thursday. 2 reasons for that. 1^st^, we usually air on
Thursday night, but I'll be in the middle of day 2 of the Sunstone
Symposium which makes it hard to put out an episode that day so you're
getting it a couple days early. 2^nd^, the information in this episode
is what Cody and I will be presenting on this upcoming Saturday morning,
so we wanted to give ample time to consume the podcast before the
presentation. In addition to that, Marie and I will be doing our live My
Book of Mormon podcast from squatter's pub on Saturday evening. We are a
pattern recognizing species so we'll be addressing this live show a
couple times in today's episode to get you guys amped up to attend the
live show, and, if you can make it, the presentation. It's a big weekend
ahead of us and I'm stoked to see some of you listeners at one or both
of these things we have planned for this Saturday. Let me give you some
details in case you've missed them up to this point. Sunstone symposium
is at the Olpin student union building at the University of Utah, Cody
and I will be presenting at 10:15 Saturday morning, and we'll be there
for the majority of the symposium itself. Marie and Joel will also be
there for most of the time. Then beginning at 7 on Saturday night, we're
setting up for the live show at Squatters on 3^rd^ south in downtown
SLC, with the actual show beginning at 8. The show is free, we just ask
for a suggested \$5-10 donation and that you tip the waiters generously.
Doug Hofeling is nice enough to be donating the space, but we need to
accommodate the wonderful staff at squatters in return for them
accommodating us. Marie and I will be reading through a very exciting
special selection of church literature, and keeping with tradition,
there will be an associated drinking game. If you're a patron, we can
buy your first drink free.

But of course, this is not all the fun and trouble we'll be getting into
while in Utah. If you can't make it to either Sunstone or the live show,
consider coming to church with Marie and I at the Joseph Smith memorial
building on Sunday at 11. Bring your red Savannah or rainbow ties or
pins or wristbands, let the porn shoulders out, do anything to show
support for the LGBTQ community or opposition to the church's public
bigotry. We're going to be respectful and reverent with peaceful protest
showing them that their bigotry affects more people than just active
members and teenagers who commit suicide in record numbers in Utah. This
is how we're ending our patreon pledge month. We consider ourselves
active in the movement of progressive Mormonism, now it's time to
actually be active by standing in solidarity for those who can't for
their own reasons. For that reason, we'll be providing tags that say
"for and in behalf of" with an empty line to write in a name so each of
us in attendance can magnify our voice with who we want to represent
that can't be there to stand for themselves. If we want the church to
become more progressive, firing shots at them from the outside only
accomplishes so much, real change comes from the inside.

Speaking of change from within a community, let's get into the episode
to see if we can shift the minds of Mormon historians to agree with the
plausibility of the Smith-entheogen theory.

Let's take a break for just a second to hear from my cohost on MyBoM,
Marie Kent, telling us about this weekend...

That does it for us today. One last time before buttoning up, we really
hope to see you at the Sunstone symposium, live show, or at the JSM
building for church on the following Sunday. If you missed the details
at any point, you can check the facebook pages for Naked Mormonism or My
Book of Mormon for the details.

Let me take a second to thank all the people that helped out during our
patreon pledge drive month by signing up to support the show at
patreon.com/nakedmormonism. These are the inductees forever memorialized
into our NaMo book of exaltation.

Preston C.\
Lynn B.\
Chris and Kristy M.\
Tyler S.\
Judy C.\
Jay M.\
Frank F.\
Clara K.\
Clint S.\
Mindy M.\
Matthew H.\
Karen H.\
Shelley H.\
Greg G.\
Andrew L.\
Shane T.\
Thomas C.\
Eric J.\
Dan W.\
Lane\
Cam L.\
Darrick E.\
Marc W.\
Larry J.\
Scot D.\
Phillip S.\
Stuart T.\
Lizzie in the Lab\
Jared R.\
Korene H.\
David F.\
Howard\
Brandon B.\
David D.\
James B.\
Doug H.\
George G.\
Doubting Dogma\
​Duenan K.

Not just these individuals, but all of you who stepped up to the plate
during this patreon pledge month deserve an undying debt of gratitude
from yours truly. Thank you to George, Greg, Jeanie, Boz, Alice, Aaron,
Stephen, Cass, Abe, Andrew, MarsGirl, Nick, Psilly Rabbits, Jennifer,
and PreTheist. Thanks to all of you for joining the NaMo family and
making this pledge drive a success. I hope to see some of you at
Squatters this Saturday night or church on the following Sunday.

Just a heads up, next week's episode may be a day or two later than the
regular scheduled Thursday release due to everything going on this
upcoming weekend. I'll only be getting home about 30 hours before it
usually releases and that's not enough time to put a good show together.
Hope that isn't an inconvenience to anybody. That being said, let's
close it down for the evening.

Thanks, most of all, to the brilliantly admirable listeners for
graciously lending me your ear.
