---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 46 - Mo Conquest and Mythicist Milwaukee pt2'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-46-mo-conquest-mythicist-milwaukee-pt2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-46-mo-conquest-and-mythicist-milwaukee-pt2
category: History
date: 2017-01-20 04:14:11 +0000
---

Ep 46 -- Mo Conquest and Mythicist Milwaukee pt2

On this episode, we begin with a wrap up of the live God Awful Movies in
Chicago and talking about everything the atheist/skeptical community has
to offer. After that we jump into a discussion about the Mormon refugee
crisis going on in mid-October 1838 in Missouri. Jo had to feed the
flock and the only way to do so was through raiding and pillaging the
Daviess County locals. We read a warm letter exchange between people on
opposing sides of the conflict along with a large excerpt from Benjamin
Johnson, the first-hand recounting from a Mormon raiding party
participant. After that we move on to part 2 of a discussion with Brian
and Sean of Mythicist Milwaukee; be sure to check their podcast feed for
part 1!

Links:

Mythicist Milwaukee interview pt1\
<http://www.stitcher.com/podcast/mythicist-milwaukee-show>

General Parks' letter to James Sloan\
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/MHS2.1Baugh-HiramParks.pdf>

Benjamin F. Johnson My Life's Review\
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/BFJohnson.html>

Reddit post w/ dove and walking on water stories\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/1dnchp/til_joseph_smith_dressed_up_like_an_angel_to_fool/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Outro music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Welcome to episode 46 of the NMPC, the serial Mormon history podcast.
Today is Thursday 19^th^ Jan 2017, my name is BB and thank you for
joining me.

Before we roundup what happened last historical episode and jump into
the meat of today's episode, we need to take a few minutes and discuss
this previous weekend and the live God Awful Movies in Chicago. In case
any of you aren't familiar with it, and I can't imagine that describes
anybody by this point, but God Awful Movies is the podcast where Noah,
Heath, and Eli of Scathing Atheist review really shitty Christian
movies. It's truly one of the best podcasts out there and they've become
successful enough to pull off live events in New York, the U.K. and now
Chicago. , last weekend they teamed up with their good friends Tom and
Cecil of Cognitive Dissonance, bringing together the most incredible
docket of offensive podcasters talking about a horrifically offensive
Christian movie. They reviewed "A right to believe" which should have
been title the right to be a bigoted asshole because it was all about
this Christian newspaper writer wanting to be a miserable hateful fuck
against gay people prior to a gay pride parade in his town. I won't
cover any more of the movie because the GAMcast episode rips it a new
asshole while simultaneously painting a fantastic picture. Do yourself
the service and follow the show notes for God Awful Movies and give it a
listen. Before they even began reviewing the movie, Eli came out in what
he must have considered a wrestling uniform, it was more Chip n' Dale
like because every wrinkle and fold of his junk was visible for all to
see. For better or worse, they don't record video of these productions,
so you're spared the horrifying visual of a penis everybody came to know
as unchallenging, but you still missed out all the other visually
hilarious shenanigans. If you have the chance to go to a live God Awful
Movies, it will change your fucking life. Nobody left the Victory
Biograph theatre unaffected. I also walked down the alleyway in which
John Dillinger was shot, lots of cool history in Chicago.

But, of course, the live show was only the beginning of the fun as the
majority of the 300 people in the theatre walked across the street and
filled a bar to the point of not even standing room. That's where we all
got to properly hang out and actually meet each other and have
conversations as opposed to watching the 5 people on a stage entertain
us. This hang out was the highlight of the trip, hands down. I was able
to meet a bunch of fellow GAMcast, scathing atheist, and cog dis fans.
It's such a fun community to be part of. Surprisingly enough I had the
opportunity to meet a couple of faces I'd met before at the Mythicist
Milwaukee debate, as well as a few people that actually listen to the
show. On last week's episode, I said that I was hoping to meet some of
you there and it happened, I couldn't believe it! Something pretty funny
happened that brought about a fun little chuckle. A big group of us were
standing outside talking about the Book of Moron introduction they did a
couple weeks back on Scathing Atheist and one guy in the circle started
talking about how excited he was for them to read the BoM because the
last year with the Qu'ran was pretty rough. The guy literally standing
next to me, I mean standing close enough to smell me, said to Noah, yeah
all I know about Mormonism is what that Bryce Blankenagel guy has done
on the show and Noah pointed at me, standing right next to him, and they
guy just stopped for a second and was like, wait, what? Are You? And I
said I'm Bryce, nice to meet you. In telling the story it's kinda lame,
but it was a funny at the time. But I spent the night bouncing around
the Mythicist Milwaukee guys, Heath, a guy with a tramp stamp that was a
giant butterfly with a cock for a body, a tattoo which Tom of Cognitive
Dissonance had just enough battery to take a picture of, Andrew Torrez,
my good friend and lawyer, guest host of Opening Arguments, the best new
podcast in the atheist and skeptical genre, and by the end of the night
I was hanging out with Ari Stillman of the Gaytheist Manifesto and Eli
Bosnick. If you're into any of the podcasts I listed, you have to come
to an event like this! The next big one will be ReasonCon in mid-April
2017 hosted in Hickory N.C. If there is a single convention you can make
it to this year, make ReasonCon it, and there's still a few months left
to plan your trip.

On the Sunday after the show I went up to Milwaukee to do an interview
with Mythicist Milwaukee, which you'll be hearing part 2 of on this
episode. One thing we discussed was what it's like to leave the church.
I told Sean and Brian that the church has an amazing social and
community based structure in place. Often when people leave the church
that entire social foundation is just stripped away from them without
anywhere to turn. If you want to take part in an open and loving
community, this is it. The best part I find is the overwhelming sense of
inclusiveness without pretentions. I mean, Noah and I spent over 4 hours
in a hotel room disagreeing about nearly every subject except football
because I know nothing about it. We talked about everything from
polyandry to the milestones being made in AI advancement with CRISPR
technology and what universal technological advancement means for
Firmy's paradox and if an Alien race exists out there far more advanced
than us, have they just killed themselves off with their technology as
we've nearly done a small handful of times? We were constantly calling
each other out on our facts and claiming skepticism when a strong case
wasn't being presented. We were able to knock holes in each other's echo
chambers and it was downright fun.

This may not be the case for many of you, but I don't know if I ever
felt that same sense of camaraderie I felt at this live podcast while I
was attending church. I felt a friendship with people I spent time with
outside of church but church wasn't necessarily the place where I felt
home inside a community. Let's face it, one of the main reasons people
stay in the church when they don't believe is the sense of community and
what will happen with their family/job/friends when they leave. Well,
I'm here to tell you that a community exists outside of the church, it
just requires more effort to be part of it. Instead of going a few miles
to church every Sunday and giving 10% of your overall income, to feel
the sense of community I'm describing it requires getting off your ass
and finding an open-minded group like the atheist/skeptical community.
That means logging in to meetup or facebook groups and actually going
out to a local monthly hangout. It means saving some extra cash to be
able to afford a weekend in Chicago or North Carolina for a convention
or live show, but it shouldn't cost anywhere near 10% of your gross
income. The community won't come to you, that's the harsh reality. If
you don't get out there, and put yourself out there, you'll never have
this broader sense of community that's so important to human survival.
Only when you can occasionally stand in a convention center with 1,500
like-minded people do you feel that overwhelming sense of empowering
solidarity. It's something for which I could never have assigned a value
without having experienced it for myself. And please, don't take my word
for it. You don't have to have an experience like my good friend
Preston. He wanted to go to an ex-Mormon meetup for quite some time and
the day he finally got up the courage and made the time to do it he sat
in his Jeep in the parking lot, terrified of what it meant in his life
if he joined up with an apostate group. That day he became part of a
group that invited him with open arms and didn't judge him based on how
nice his suit was, how many kids he had, or what kind of car he drove.

Maybe I'm just beating a dead horse by this point, but I guess it comes
down to whether or not you value a sense of community with kindred
spirits, right? Nothing I could say will convince you to go to ReasonCon
in April, you have to convince yourself. You have to make a judgement
call and decide if it's worth the investment of time, money, and energy,
I can only tell you from having attended a number of these conventions
now, the benefits I reap from being there constantly draws me back for
more at nearly any cost. It's almost an addiction, but a pretty good
addiction to be suffering from, in my opinion.

All of that aside, Chicago is a great city. I spent the time I wasn't
hanging with other podcasters touring the Chicago history museum, the
Science and Industry Museum where I toured a captured German U-boat from
1944, the Lincoln Park Zoo, walked up Michigan Ave, I stared at a
gigantic chrome bean, and more than anything else I just absorbed the
atmosphere and old architecture. I can't wait to go back when my hands
have finally unfrozen from their current claw-like state. Seriously,
Chicago in January is not a habitable place for humans to live.

Alright, I suppose that was everything I needed to mention for now,
let's get to today's episode. Given the time restraint this last weekend
has placed on the regular schedule, today's episode will be a shorter
history segment with a discussion portion tacked on at the end.

Last episode was a discussion with Cara Santa Maria and some random
musings from yours truly. The last historical timeline episode covered
so much time and a number of confusing events all leading up to Governor
Lilburn Boggs' Mormon extermination order. We didn't quite get to that
specifically as that was getting a bit ahead of ourselves.

Last historical episode we began with proper introductions for General's
Alexander Doniphan and David Atchison, two non-Mormon lawyers and
generals of the state militia who were friendly to the Mormons. These
two men would be the legal counsel for Jo and Lyman Wight during their
preliminary hearing on Raglin's Farm. This hearing was to determine if
there was sufficient evidence to convict the two men of mob violence, as
the Danites had surrounded the homes of government officials and imposed
their will upon them. Judge Austin A. King presiding came down with the
judgement that there was enough evidence to move forward with a Grand
Jury trial, a verdict the Mormons saw as unfair but was probably the
best option given the angry anti-Mormon mob surrounding them. Anything
to stop a riot from breaking out was a good move.

After that we discussed the rumors proliferating that were claiming the
Mormons were trying to ally themselves with the Native Americans.
There's no evidence to suggest it's true, but personally I think it's
entirely possible.

After talking about the rumors and the bias fake news was creating, we
discussed the greater impact of the Danites stealing a convoy of 45 guns
and taking 3 men prisoner. In response, Dr. W.W. Austin's troops, who
were en route to DeWitt, turned around and made their way to Diahman to
lay siege to the Mormon settlement. General Doniphan arrived just in the
nick of time before a fight broke out and camped with his troops in
no-man's land between the fortified Diahman and Austin's troops to
stifle the conflict. The Mormons negotiated terms to buy out all the
non-Mormons living in Daviess county, in return, Austin's troops made
their way back to DeWitt and laid proper siege until the Mormons there
surrendered and moved back to Caldwell or Daviess counties.

During all of these times of combative frustration between the Mormon
leadership and the anti-Mormon mobs, the people that suffered were the
everyday Mormon or Missourian with very little personal stake in the
conflict. Mormons were starving and sick children were dying from
exposure after being forced from their homes. Jo had to do something to
keep his flock alive through the impending Missouri winter.

We finished out the episode discussing Jo, Mo, and Aversions Crown, all
seekers of truth who began as prophets and slowly evolved into military
leaders closely mingling religious and secular authority. It all spawned
from a quote Jo gave claiming that he would be a second Mohammet to this
generation. We'll discuss that soon, but that does it for the milk of
today's episode, let's get into the meat.

When we left off Jo and friends, they were looking for some possible way
to save the Mormons from the winter that lay ahead. Once DeWitt was
taken over, the Mormons realized that no matter who was right or wrong
in the situation, regardless of who had the high ground, they were the
outsiders to the Missourians and there was simply no way they could
legally win the war. So, Jo chose to act in a war-like way to keep his
flock alive.

Beginning with October 15^th^, he called upon the Danites and Army of
Israel, there's some dispute over whether those terms were synonymous,
but essentially any Mormon man they could arm was called upon to gather
at Diahman to prepare for battle.

This is when the weather begins to have a bit of an impact. The plains
of Russia during winter were known to the German soldiers as General
Winter, or General Frost. The weather can drastically change tactics or
put entire strategies on hold for periods of time. This time approaching
late October 1838, General Winter began to play a few cards into the
Mormon-Missouri war game.

The Mormons were planning their march but were snowed in for 2 days
before they could begin the offensive. I'm going to read this timeframe
out of the History of the Church to see how it was recorded and
subsequently read by believing Mormons for over a century. I'm reading
out of a 1948 publication volume 3:162

"Monday, Oct 15^th^. ---The Brethren assembled on the public square of
Far West and formed a company of about one hundred, who took up a line
of march of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Here let it be distinctly understood that
this company were militia of the county of Caldwell, acting under
Lieutenant-Colonel George M. Hinkle, (Hinkle was a state employed
militia officer but he was working strictly under the orders of Joseph
Smith here so the militia itself was not state sanctioned, that's a very
important distinction and a noteworthy distortion of the truth)
agreeable to the order of General Doniphan, and the brethren were very
careful in all their movements to act in strict accordance with the
constitutional laws of the land.

The special object of this march was to protect Adam-ondi-Ahmen, and
repel the attacks of the mob in Daviess county. Having some property in
that county, and having a house building there, I went up at the same
time. While I was there a number of houses belonging to our people were
burned by the mob, who committed many other depredations, such as
driving off horses, sheep, cattle, hogs, etc. A number of those whose
houses were burned down, as well as those who lived in scattered and
lonely situations, fled into the town for safety, and for shelter from
the inclemency of the weather, as a considerable snowstorm took place on
the 17^th^ and 18^th^."

Things were not getting better as Mormons were being chased from their
homes and this reinforcement squad of 100-150 armed men marched to
Diahman.

"Women and children, some in the most delicate condition, were thus
obliged to leave their homes and travel several miles in order to
effect\[affect\] the escape. My feelings were such as I cannot describe
when I saw them flock into the village, almost entirely destitute of
clothes, and only escaping with their lives.

During this state of affairs, General Parks arrived in Daviess county,
and was at the house of Colonel Lyman Wight on the 18^th^, when the
intelligence was brought that the mob were burning houses; and also when
women and children were fleeing for safety, among whom was Agnes M.
Smith, wife of my brother, Don Carlos Smith, who was absent on a mission
in Tennessee. Her house had been plundered and burned by the mob, and
she had traveled nearly three miles, carrying her two helpless babes,
and had to wade Grand river."

You see how desperate things are getting?

"Colonel Wight, who held a commission in the 59^th^ regiment under his
(Park's) command, asked what was to be done. Parks told him that he must
immediately call out his men and go and put the mob down.
Accordingly\[,\] a force was immediately raised for the purpose of
quelling the mob, and in a short time was on its march, with a
determination to disperse the mob, or die in the attempt; as the people
could bear such treatment as was being inflicted upon them no longer.

The mob, having learned the orders of General Parks, and likewise being
aware of the determination of the oppressed, broke up their encampment
and fled. The mob seeing that they could not succeed by force, now
resorted to stratagem; and after removing their property out of their
houses, which were nothing but log cabins, they fired them, and then
reported to the authorities of the state that the "Mormons" were burning
and destroying all before them."

This is the history of the church, how faithful Mormons today might read
it. There were a few factual inaccuracies throughout, but the largest
and most glaring problem was Jo laying it all on General Parks. Parks
was friendly to the Mormons, similar in attitude to Generals Atchison
and Doniphan, but he had absolutely no part in the Mormon looting, that
was all done under the leadership of the Danites which all stemmed from
commands issued by Commander-in-chief Jo. We have an 1839 letter from
General Hiram Parks to a Mormon James Sloan in Quincy, Illinois, and it
enlightens us as to his personality a bit. This is hosted on
mormonhistoricsites.org and there will be a link in the show notes.

"Dear Sir

I have received 2 letters from you since I last seen \[saw\] you on the
subject of your gun but have delayed answering them untill I co\[u\]ld
learn of the Governor what disposition he would make of the guns
surrendered by your people15 Shortly after the rise of the Genl assembly
last spring he (the governor) directed his Aiddecamp16 Mr. W. C.
Williams17 of this place to let the Mormons have there guns by swearing
to them besides doing this they had to pay the Justice of the Peace his
fees and Mr. Williams fifty Cents on each gun for his tro\[u\]ble of
handing them out to this rule of his I have demonstrated time after time
but all to \[no\] purpose I have no doubt but that your gun is here18
but here but it can not be drawn unless you swear here or some one for
you to prove the gun \[was\] the gun that was surrendered to me at Adam
ondiamon \[which\] I delivered to Maj Genl John B. Clark at Far West who
had the command of all the military forces at that time I am verry sorry
for such a state of things to exist in the state in which I live but it
is not less true that the Governor has holy \[wholly\] disregarded the19
treaty made with your people and by the officers commanding the forces
sent against you at that time \[p. 2\] I have written to the Governor a
few days \[ago\] in relation to know what he intends to do in relation
to the ballance of20 the guns yet at this place and so \[as\] soon as I
receive an answer from him I will write to you and if I can be of any
service to you in processing your gun I will certainly do so. I would be
glad to here how your familly are and how they are satisfide with their
new home tell Mary Jane21 that I would be glad if22 she would send that
cow & calf that I own of hers tell her to write to me and let me know
how she is doing and if she is married or expects to be in a short time
tell Mrs. Sloan23 that I would be glad to see her Write to me on the
receipt \[of\] this Give my Respects to all my enquiring frends and
except \[accept\] for yourself my best wishes for your future welfare I
am yours Respectfully H. G. Parks"

Kind of offers a window into the human experience behind these fighting
groups of men.

Back to the HC volume 3.

"As I was driven away from Kirtland without the privilege of settling my
business, I had, previous to this, employed Colonel Oliver Granger as my
agent, to close all my affairs in the east; and as I have been accused
of "running away, cheating my creditors, etc., I will insert one of the
many cards and letters I have received from gentlemen who have had the
best opportunity of knowing my business transactions, and whose
testimony comes unsolicited:

A card.

Painesville, Oct 19,1838.

We, the undersigned, being personal acquaintances of Oliver Granger,
firmly believe that the course which he had pursued in settling the
claims, account, etc., against the former citizens of Kirtland township,
has done much credit to himself, and all others that committed to him
the care of adjusting their business with this community, which also
furnishes evidence that there was no intention on their part of
defrauding their creditors.

\[SIGNED\]

Thomas Griffith,

John S. Seymour"

Given Jo's terrible business practices and persecution narrative
rhetorical bullshit that was constantly exploding from the pulpit, was
obliged to take action. We read a small excerpt from this next piece
last episode to finish out the show, but let's read the entire Thomas B.
Marsh affidavit and put that "second Mohammet" quote into proper
context.

"They have among them a company, considered true Mormons, called the
Danites, who have taken an oath to support the heads of the church in
all things that they say or do, whether right or wrong. Many, however,
of this band are much dissatisfied with this oath,, as being against
moral and religious principles. On Saturday last, I am informed by the
Mormons, that they had a meeting at Far West, at which they appointed a
company of twelve, by the name of the 'Destruction Company,' for the
purpose of burning and destroying,...and if the people of Clay and Ray
made any movement against them, this destroying company were to burn
Liberty and Richmond. The prophet inculcates the notion, and it is
believed by every true Mormon, that Smith's prophecies are superior to
the laws of the land. I have heard the Prophet say that he would yet
tread down his enemies, and walk over their dead bodies; and if he was
not let alone, he would be a second Mohammed to this generation, and
that he would make it one gore of blood from the Rocky mountains to the
Atlantic ocean; that\[,\] like Mohammed, whose motto in treating for
peace was, 'the Alcoran or the Sword.' So should it be eventually with
us, 'Joseph Smith or the Sword.'... The number of armed men at
Adam-ondi-Ahmen was between three and four hundred.

\[SIGNED\]

Thomas B. Marsh"

That was the entirety of the quote we just read a small excerpt from at
the end of the last historical episode. To solve this refugee crisis on
Jo's hands, he decided to become that second Mohammed. Apostle David W.
, known as Captain Fearnaught to the men he led, organized an army of
150 men and they rode to the small town of Gallatin, where the election
battle had occurred 2 months prior. The majority of the men of the town
were in the town saloon at the time and when they saw the Mormons
cresting the horizon en masse, they ran for their lives.

General Lyman Wight organized 80 men together, declaring, "It would be
only a breakfast spell to whip the Missourians. Many of them will be
drunk and if they come against us we will hew them down like old
stumps." He took those 80 men and rode them to Millport. When they
arrived, the town was essentially empty. The violence had been enough to
this point that nearly every non-Mormon living in Daviess county had
fled, so Millport was basically a ghost town when General Wight and his
men arrived.

Captain Fearnaught and General Wight had orders that would serve to be
the downfall of the Mormons and cause them to lose 17 of their brothers
in a week's time. They looted everything in these towns and burned them
to the ground. They chased the few remaining people from their homes,
piled all the looted possessions into the middle of town and burned all
the structures before loading up everything they could carry and taking
it back to the bishop's storehouse in Diahman.

This was premeditated. A man named Jacob Stollings owned a small
merchant store in Gallatin. When Capt Fearnaught chased Stollings out,
well, lemme just read from the 1838 Mormon War in Missouri to describe
the situation. This is page 119.

"Some of the Missourians who were threatened or had their homes
plundered and burned were actually friends of the Mormons. Jacob
Stollings, a Gallatin merchant, had sold goods to the Saints on credit,
to be paid for when their crops were harvested. When Captain Patten's
company attacked Gallatin, they plundered and burned Stollings' store
and confiscated his receipt books, which he never recovered."

If you're literally stealing the receipt books from somebody you owe a
lot of money to, that's malicious and premeditated. But Benjamin
Franklin Johnson, who we've relied upon for his first-hand account many
times in the past described it well. This is taken from page 42 of his
personal history, linked in the show notes.

"Here let me say that it should not be supposed, though we sought to
repel mob violence and were compelled to forage for food when hemmed in
on all sides by a mob who had driven us from homes they had sold to us
and been paid for, robbing us of everything but our lives and the little
we could carry away leaving our crops, stock and household goods to our
enemies, that we were common robbers because we took by reprisal that
with which to keep from starvation our women and children. Ours was a
struggle for our lives and homes, and a more conscientious, noble, and
patriotic spirit never enthused man than that which animated our leaders
in this just defense of our rights."

A struggle for our lives and homes to keep our women and children from
starvation. That is the harsh reality that underlies this entire
conflict. That is the human element we need to focus on. From earlier in
Johnson's autobiography:

"Coming one morning just at daylight from off picket duty I saw a squad
of brethren, among whom was my then intimate friend and bosom companion,
W. D. Huntington, brother of Sister Zina D., and I asked where they were
going, but he only took time to say, \"Come and see.\" So without food
other than a piece of corn cake or \"dodger\" as it was then termed, and
after an all-night guard and fast, I started upon a two-year-old colt
which by some circumstance I had got astride of, and fell into rank with
a company of near twenty mounted men, with Cornelius P. Lot as our
Captain. I soon learned our destination was to Taylor\'s on Grand River,
about nine miles above, where it was said arms and ammunition were held
for the use of the mob. On arriving opposite the houses, which were on
the river bank, we saw a commotion, and persons step back into the
cornfield which was close by. We hastily crossed the river, surrounded
the house, and myself with others, went for those who had fled. One man
I saw and followed, and as he dodged behind a large oak stub, Alex.
Williams came on one side as I came on the other. Thus we caught him. It
was the first prisoner I had ever assisted to take, and I learned
something of the influence of fear upon the human heart; for as we put
our hands upon his shoulders there was such a look of expectant death,
and such begging for his life, and then to see a fine looking married
man so filled with fear that \[as\] he sank upon the ground \[his bowels
seemed to pour all their contents into his linen pantaloons and into his
sockless shoes\]. This was one of the Taylors to whom again I may refer.
But we calmed his fears, told him for what purpose we had come, and that
if there really were no arms or ammunition stored there to be used
against us, we should leave them as we found them; but if we found they
had those things we would burn them out. There were two men with a
number of women and children, and all affirmed that there was nothing of
the kind there. After a thorough search of houses, barns, etc., our
captain ordered a search in the cornfields to hunt the cornshocks, which
soon resulted in the discovery of arms and ammunition and of their
falsehoods. The females hastily took from the houses what they could
carry, and here I might say there was almost a trial of my faith in my
pity for our enemies, even those who were plotting our destruction.
Among the women was one, young married and apparently near her
confinement, and another with small children and not a wagon, and many
miles away from any of their friends, and snow had begun already (in
November) \[probably October\] to fall. My sympathies were drawn toward
the women and children, but I would in no degree let them deter me from
duty. So while others were pillaging for something to carry away, I was
doing my best to protect, as far as possible, the lives and comfort of
the families who were dependent on getting away upon horseback. When the
horses were brought up for their use, there was one animal with a side
saddle, on which the young woman was to get away; but it was taken away
by one Sloan, who had kept the boarding house where I stayed, a man of
education and apparently a gentleman. It was too much for me, so I took
the animal away from him by force, and put her upon it, and then got
from another roll of homemade cloth and fastened it on behind her. While
others were doing the burning and plunder, my mission was of mercy so
far as duty would permit. But of course I made enemies at home, and
became more known by those who were our avowed enemies. Before noon we
had set all on \[fire?\] and left upon a circuitous route towards home.
As yet I had had nothing to eat and was much in need of food, and before
starting went to a beehive and took in the hollow of a half pumpkin some
beautiful white comb honey, ate a little as I went, looked at it and
wished I might eat more, but as I could not, I set it upon a stump,
where I have many times thought of it through the 56 years that have
since passed."

After Captain Fearnaught's and General Wight's troops returned to the
bishop's storehouse in Diahman with their mounds of goods heaped on each
horse's back, a man named Seymour Brunson led a troop of 100 armed men
to Grindstone where there was rumor of Col. Neil Gilliam gathering an
armed force of vigilantes to stop the Mormon conquest. Brunson's army
met with no opposition that day but looted and burned every home from
Diahman to Grindstone.

Johnathan Dunham led a company of 50 men to the outerlying countryside
and looted every building they could possibly find, taking a few
prisoners.

From the 1838 Mormon War in Missouri:

"At the end of the day these companies returned to Diahman with cattle,
hogs, and an abundance of property, but they had encountered no enemy
troops."

Thus, ended the Mormon conquest of Daviess County of 18 October 1838.
This had many profound effects. First, it showed the Missourians that
the Mormons were finally going to make good on the rhetoric they'd been
spewing from the pulpit for months now. If they were claiming a war of
extermination and saying they wouldn't deal with the Missourian
aggression, this was proof. They went out on this conquest with the
resolve to destroy any militia or mob they came against, and luckily for
everybody the groups didn't meet, but they had the motivation and
solidarity to act aggressively as an army, raiding and pillaging, living
off the spoils of war. The problem the Mormons had of starvation was no
longer an issue. Last episode I said that Jo had two problems on his
hands. The Mormons were either going to die from starvation or die from
too much lead ripping holes in their bodies. He dealt with the first
problem first as it seemed more pressing. People were dying from
exposure and lack of resources so Jo took care of that problem first
before the second problem became an inevitability. Unfortunately for
all, this raiding solution vastly contributed to the second problem
metastasizing.

As each of these places in Daviess county were raided and the people
were chased out, those people had to go somewhere. Most of them spread
out to non-Mormon safehavens in nearby Clay, Ray, Liberty, Saline, or
Carroll counties. As these people were trickling in to local Missouri
towns, they were relaying to the non-Mormon Missourians, many of which
hated the Mormons, stories of what they'd just experienced. As is
typical for this entire few months of Mormon history, rumors spreading
contributed to the problem and effectively burned any bridges the
Mormons had with any non-Mormon allies.

Boggs and the Missouri government in Richmond, Ray county were
absolutely flooded with reports of Mormon aggression in Daviess county.
This was activity on a whole new level and the government needed to act
appropriately in response. The first thing Boggs did was fire
Major-General David Atchison and promote John B. Clark to Atchison's
position of Maj-Gen of the Missouri militia. Atchison, being the
highest-ranking field officer in Missouri, had been unsuccessful in
quelling the Mormon insurrection in Boggs' mind, so he put somebody in
that was less sympathetic to the Mormons. Of the many interactions we
have on record between Boggs and Atchison, I personally think this was
the worst thing Boggs could have done. Atchison was one of the few
people in the middle of the situation that understood what was going on
and had rightfully claimed multiple times the Mormons were acting on the
defensive for the entire conflict up to this point. Another underlying
theme in these letter exchanges was Atchison constantly pleading for
Boggs to make a personal appearance. Atchison wasn't the only one
pleading for personal intervention from Boggs, Brigadier-General Hiram
Parks asked for the same thing many times saying, "He need not order out
any forces, those already ordered by me I deem sufficient. You know a
word from his Excellency would have more power to quell this affair than
a regiment." (November Court documents)

Atchison being removed from the case left a large workload to fall on
the shoulders of Generals Doniphan and Parks, two non-Mormon friendly
state militia-men, as well as to Generals Clark and Lucas, Captain
Bogart, and Colonel Neil Gilliam all 4 of which hated the Mormons. The
Mormons lost their primary ally in the fight. Atchison would stick
around and continue correspondence, but he was officially removed from
being head General over the case, making way for anti-Mormon militia
leaders to take his place.

Governor Lilburn Boggs, of course, was absolutely flooded over the next
week with reports of the Mormon depredations in Daviess county. Boggs
knew that the Mormons were plutonium to any political career, nobody
could safely touch them and come away unscathed. Even Martin Van Buren
realized this in the following years when Jo met with him to ask for
reconciliation in Missouri, Van Buren turned him away essentially saying
he can't take sides with the Mormons. Generals Atchison and Doniphan
would go on after this Mormon conflict in Missouri and have very
successful careers, but when the Mormons had such a successful conquest,
even they said that the Mormons were fanatics needing to be put down.

Boggs' refusal to appear in person may have cost many people their
lives. He had been responsible for calling together militias and
immediately disbanding them upon receiving new intel more than once. You
know why those costly and ridiculous situations happened? Boggs would
hear rumor that the Mormons were acting aggressively and call together
the militia to quell the problem. A few days later some trusted
individuals as part of investigative committees would return to his
office with reports that the Mormons were acting defensively and there
was no need for the militia to answer to Mormon military actions. It
wasn't hard for these committees to ascertain the truth upon personally
examining the situation, and Boggs simply needed to do the same to allay
his own apprehensions and rid himself of confusion with the whole Mormon
situation. When Boggs began his career, he was friendly to the Mormons,
now he couldn't be trusted because he only seemed to take actions
against them. And when it came to doing anything on behalf of the
Mormons, Boggs simply couldn't be bothered. There is no question in my
mind that if somebody more qualified and active in the conflict were
governor, like Atchison, for example, the Battle at Crooked River never
would have happened, nor would have the extermination order or Haun's
mill massacre. One person in an important position with a slightly
increased amount of give-a-fuck, and this whole story would have been a
non-issue in American history.

Let's look at Jo, Hyrum, and Rigdon for a minute, the leadership of the
church and the Mormon militias. I'll just refer to them royally as Jo
because when it all came down to it, he was the prophet and he was
calling the final shots in all these situations, Rigdon and Hyrum were
merely his counsellors through it all. The Missourian mobocrats, as he
called them, had done everything possible in their power to fuck with
the Mormons. No matter what the situation, whether it was inflating the
cost of a bushel of corn by 300%, refusing to let the Mormons use the
mill at Grindstone, surrounding their towns and running military drills
outside, all while being supplied by the local non-Mormon population,
refusing to buy goods just because they're being sold by a Mormon,
barring their right to vote and inciting a brawl during a hotly
contested election, and most of all, chasing the Mormons out of their
homes simply because they do not belong there; the Missourians were just
assholes to the Mormons. That last one is crucial. So much of the
pressure all boils down to who has the right to what land. Mormons had
the right to settle on any property they pleased as long as it was
acquired through legal means. That's the case for everybody in America.
You get some land for yourself, you have the right to live there and
nobody has the right to remove you from your property. Unfortunately,
things weren't so cut-and-dried. The Mormons had acquired most of their
land through legal means, but weren't able to pay for it. The majority
of the people chasing the Mormons out of their homes weren't the
rightful landowners given the Mormons defaulting on their loans, they
just knew the Mormons weren't paying for what they were using and saw it
as their right to remove the Mormons and allow somebody to settle the
land that *would* pay for it. This is often sold as religious
persecution, ignorantly simplifying away so much nuance, nuance which
helps to explain the real issues.

The Mormons were reacting to the pressure exuded by the Missourians.
More from the autobiography of Benjamin F. Johnson:

> "On our way home our company divided to scout in different directions,
> and we soon came upon a fine looking band of horses following a brood
> mare with a bell. As I was upon this two-year-old colt and wished one
> for heavier service I thought it a good time to make trial to get one.
> So as a comrade offered to take my gun and lead my animal by the
> halter, I took the bridle and started with two others who volunteered
> to go with me for the same purpose. It was now in the afternoon, and
> clouds were rising as though it would rain, but we pushed with hope
> and earnestness for our animals, who, like the ignis fatuus
> (will-o\'-the-wisp) were always just ahead but never to be overtaken
> and caught. Yet we followed until it began to rain, and then we lost
> the track of our party and were lost. As it grew dusk we hastened, but
> failed to find our way or trail. After dark we struck a trail which we
> followed for miles, nearing a large body of timber, and knowing that
> there was a mob gathering on what was called the grindstone, and
> fearing we were going in that direction, we halted. As one of our
> party had a flintlock musket we managed by care to get a light started
> with it, in the trail we were following, and soon discovered that our
> party had not passed that way. I felt sure we were going in the wrong
> direction and said we must take another direction. I extinguished the
> fire, and as I did so and we turned our course we heard but a few rods
> behind us a party of horsemen who galloped off another direction,
> which proved we were near the mob encampment. We found and followed
> another trail until near midnight, and I became so weary and faint
> through want of sleep and food, I felt I should soon be compelled to
> stop. We were in some creek bottom among the timber, and soon came to
> a clearing with a number of houses. There being no moon and cloudy it
> was very dark and their outlines could barely be discerned. We drew
> near with great caution and seeing no evidence of life, I determined
> to ascertain if anyone was there, and if so, to learn if we could get
> food and chance to rest. I told my companions if anything befell me to
> come to the rescue, or go and report. I knocked at the first house but
> no answer; went to the next with same result, and finding the third to
> be a barn I returned to the first and called my companions. We found
> doors and windows barred, but forced an entrance through a window. The
> first step after reaching the floor, I fell headlong into a cellar
> under the floor, where a part of what were called \"puncheons,\" had
> been pulled up, with which to brace windows and door. I got out of the
> cellar, called my companions to bring their guns, by means of which we
> soon succeeded in making a fire. On lighting up we found some family
> had apparently just left, as nearly everything but beds, clothing and
> food, was present. I soon had a fire and on a pile of deer skins made
> me a bed, telling my companions that I could not watch, and that we
> should perhaps be discovered before morning. And so, wet, hungry and
> tired, and more dead than alive, I fell asleep. I had slept perhaps a
> couple of hours when I was disturbed by some call that broke upon my
> dead asleep but waking senses. \"Who is there?\" was repeated again
> and again. More asleep than awake I answered, \"Me!\" \"What\'s your
> name?\" came next, I said, \"Benjamin F. Johnson.\" My name was passed
> around the house and I knew we were surrounded. Directly I beard one
> of the party say, \"I know him,\" and he at once dismounted and came
> in. I saw it was Brother John Butler, whose acquaintance I had made in
> a snowstorm a few days before. When finding him one of our most
> valiant men with nothing but some green cowhide on his feet as
> moccasins, I gave him my only shoes that were of any value, and now as
> by special providence had upon my feet a most excellent pair of new
> calfskin boots, by which I felt I had been the greatest gainer.
>
> We told Brother Butler how we came there and he said we were then on
> the right road, but near nine miles from home. He had been out on
> special commission and was riding the Prophet\'s black horse,
> \"Charley.\" He told his companions to return to Diahman, and that he
> would remain with us, which he did. In the early morning he led the
> way some mile and a half towards our enemies\' camp, to the smoldering
> ruins of a house apparently burned the day before to find something to
> eat. The only things to be found were a pile of onions and a flock of
> chickens, one of which we soon had boiling with onions in a stray
> dinner pot. But we did not then, so near our enemies, feel great
> delicacy as to our cooking, for we were governed by the idea of \"eat
> to live\" and we felt that the quicker we could eat our chicken and
> onions and get from there the greater was our chance to live; thus the
> onions were but half done and the chicken none too tender. Close by
> was an old bell cow, and cattle scattered about on the prairie; so
> while we were getting our breakfast, which was not long, Brother
> Butler had taken a gourd shell with salt and commenced calling, \"Sook
> bos! sook bos!\" The bell cow at once started for salt, with all the
> cattle after her, and soon he was ahead on old Charley with a herd of
> cattle following. As it went by us we fell in behind and followed to
> Diahman. When within a mile or two we heard a firing of the cannon
> which had that night arrived, having been taken from the mob and
> rooted up by the old sow as related in history. Our animals, nearly
> forty head of good beef cattle for our famishing people, was a godsend
> indeed, and so regarded by all.
>
> Here let me say that it should not be supposed, though we sought to
> repel mob violence and were compelled to forage for food when hemmed
> in on all sides by a mob who had driven us from homes they had sold to
> us and been paid for, robbing us of everything but our lives and the
> little we could carry away leaving our crops, stock and household
> goods to our enemies, that we were common robbers because we took by
> reprisal that with which to keep from starvation our women and
> children. Ours was a struggle for our lives and homes, and a more
> conscientious, noble, and patriotic spirit never enthused man than
> that which animated our leaders in this just defense of our rights."

Over the next few historical episodes we'll be reading large excerpts
from journals and autobiographies because these people were actually
there. One thing we try to do here is bring to you the human element
that often gets lost in historical studies. We have to try and ascertain
what happened by reading first-hand sources and looking at the
circumstantial evidence to build a narrative or historical theory to
explain the sequence of events. When we talk about this militia chasing
people from their homes, or another militia surrounding DeWitt or
Diahman, those are just faceless gray masses of bodies. We don't really
understand what it was like to be there until we read the situation
recounted through the eyes of people like Ben Johnson here.

It really forces me to reflect on rights. Who had the right to do what
they did? With how convoluted the historical record is for this time,
it's hard to determine if/when any single group was in the right in
doing what they did. Were the Mormons in the right removing all the
citizens from Daviess county from their homes? Were the vigilante
militias in the right in chasing the Mormons out of Carroll county only
a week before? If it meant life or death, did the Mormons have a right
to raid and steal food to fight off impending mass starvation? Did the
Missourians have the right to chase Mormons off their land when they
defaulted on their loans back in 1833, essentially being a main causal
factor in this whole conflict? There's no simple answer. No single group
had the ethical high ground, even if actions taken by the militias
against the Mormons were legally sanctioned by the local government, it
doesn't mean they were right.

I guess that's where the meaning of "right" can broaden its scope a bit
to include ethically right. With our expanded definition, who was really
right in this whole situation? With a simple story, you have a
protagonist, an antagonist, and a story arc. Good guys and bad guys are
often fleshed out within the first few chapters or scenes. And, of
course, at the end of 400 pages or an hour and a half, the protagonist's
struggle reaches its crescendo and the story ends. Maybe this is why I
love studying history so much, because it breaks all the conventions of
what we call basic story-telling. Real life is far more complicated than
what a story-teller can illustrate for us in a given period of time
through a given medium. And the story must go on.

Next historical episode we'll get into the Battle of Crooked River and
Boggs' harsh reaction in response to Mormon violence. As stated at the
beginning of the episode, what you're about to hear is part 2 of a
discussion I had with Brian and Sean of Mythicist Milwaukee last Sunday.
Part 1 of the discussion is up on their podcast feed so be sure to
follow the show notes to give it a listen. Also, we took 360 video of
the interview. It was my first time using my 360-camera for an interview
and I learned some things to do and not to do from it, so it's not
great, but the video should be available for supporters of the show on
patreon.com/nakedmormonism within the next 24-36 hours. In watching
back, it feels like you're just sitting in the room with us having a
conversation with the ability to look around and pan from one person to
the next, it really opens up a lot of possibilities for these kinds of
interviews in the future. I really hope to hear your thoughts on the
video and maybe some ways we can improve the experience for the viewers.
If you guys like these 360 interviews, let me know and I'll get to work
on incorporating them into the show any way possible.

Without further ado, this is the interview with Mythicist Milwaukee...
