---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 48 - Haun’s Mill Massacre
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-48-hauns-mill-massacre-listen-ep-48/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-48-hauns-mill-massacre
category: History
date: 2017-02-16 20:02:51 PST
---

Ep 48 – Haun’s Mill Massacre

On this episode, we finally dive into something highly anticipated for
years, the Haun’s Mill Massacre. The title says it all; we discuss very
adult concepts with graphic detail (listener discretion advised). We
read 5 first-hand accounts of the massacre and bring it all together
with Stephen LeSueur’s reconstruction of events. We finish out with a
list of factors that lead to this fateful day in American history.

Links:

Amanda Barnes Smith  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/1781809>

Lyman Omer Littlefield Autobiography  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html>

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

Ellis Eames  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/12594448>

Mrs. Lucy Walker (Smith) Kimball:  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

Mormon Mimzy:

Lucy Smith’s dream in Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet
to his Progenitors pp 54

“I thought that I stood in a large and beautiful meadow, which lay a
short distance from the house in which we lived, and that everything
around me wore an aspect of peculiar pleasantness. The first thing That
attracted my special attention in this magnificent meadow, was a very
pure and clear stream of water, which ran through the midst of it; and
as I traced this stream, I discovered two trees standing upon its
margin, both of which were on the same side of the stream. These trees
were very beautiful, they were well proportioned, and towered with
majestic beauty to a great height. Their branches, which added to their
symmetry and glory, commenced near the top, and spread themselves in
luxurious grandeur around. I gazed upon them with wonder and admiration;
and after beholding them a short time, I saw one of them was surrounded
with a bright belt, that shone like burnished gold, but far more
brilliantly. Presently, a gently breeze passed by, and the tree
encircled with this golden zone, bent gracefully before the wind, and
waved its beautiful branches in the light air.”

![](media/image1.png)

Background:

Amanda Barnes Smith  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/1781809>

“When I was in my eighteenth year I was married to Warren Smith, brother
to David, who married my sister Fanna, unto whom I bore five children:
Willard Gilbert born May 9, 1827; Sardis Washington born Sept. 26, 1828;
Alma Lamoni, born Dec. 16, 1831; Alvira Lavoni, born Dec. 16, 1831;
Ortencia Howard, born May 27, 1837. When I married my husband he had
plenty of this world's good, I knew no want, we lived comfortably
together nothing particular transpired until Sidney Rigdon and Orson
Hyde came along preaching Cambellism. I was converted to that doctrine
and baptised by Sidney Rigdon, my hus­band did not much like that, tho
it was by his permission, by this time I had two children and the Doctor
in consequence of my suffering advised me to have no more, but thanks be
to my Heavenly Father, the gospel came along and I was baptised by
Simeon D. Carter the first day of April eighteen hundred and thirty one.
It was by the mercy and power of God that I was brought to a knowledge
of the truth and before a year I gave birth to a pair of twins without a
pain, thanks to my Father in Heaven, that made an awful stir. My mother
would not stay in the house because she found out that I had the elders
pray for me when I was sick or when they were born. My neighbors thought
I ought to be drummed out of town, my husband had been baptised before
that time so we were united and they could do nothing.

My husband's father, Chileab Smith and brothers, David and Syl­vester,
were both baptised, as also Betsy, Sylvester's wife. When David was
baptised Fanny, my sister, howled and screamed so that she was heard a
half mile, she said she never would eat nor drink until he left the
Mormons, she was as good as her word, she went eight or nine days until
she was just about gone and would not put nor let a drop of anything go
into her mouth. When her husband saw that she would die he sent and had
his name taken off from the church record; his father soon followed, so
by one woman, two men fell. Sylvester was a smart and good man. He was
chosen one of the first high council in Kirtland, was one of Zions Camp
and attached to good things - he attained to great height, and
knowledge, then fell away and was lost.

Warren maintained his integrity till the last. He sold out his property
in Amherst and went to Kirtland and bought down west of the temple on
the Shagrin river. He enjoyed himself well, done all he could to
establish the bank and build the temple. Through the downfall of that
place in consequence of our enemies he lost his property, except only a
bare outfit with which he started with his family for the land of
Missouri, in the spring of eighteen thirty eight when he bid farewell to
the land of our fathers and birth and took up our line of march for the
land of the saints. We visited our friends in Amherst but the treatment
we received will never be forgotten by me. My mother said she hoped she
should never see me, hear of me nor hear my name mentioned in the world
again, but we bid them good-by and left them.

Lyman Omer Littlefield Autobiography  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html>

“The arrival of Joseph Smith and his first counselor, Sidney Rigdon, at
Far West was a cause of great rejoicing among the Saints. They had fled
from the intrigues of a dangerous conspiracy in Kirtland, originating in
the bosoms of those very men who had been blessed with the enlightening
influences of the spirit of God, which flowed to them through the
channel of the gospel which the angel from the courts of glory had
revealed to the very man whom they persecuted; that man who had given
them his confidence, placed them in positions of prominence and trusted
them as true servants of God's kingdom, and personal friends. Truly, "a
Prophet is not without honor save in his own country and with those of
his own household."

Joseph had escaped from the machinations of his own brethren, it is
true, and the snare they set for his feet, but he was destined not to
find much peace in Missouri. A few months, at most, were all the time
allotted him for a partial rest from the turbulence and sufferings to be
inflicted by a powerful foe. But then--as was ever the case with
him--the whole energies of his soul were absorbed in the glorious
latter-day work to which he had been called by his Divine Master. Of
this great man the humble writer of this little volume had been an
admirer ever since the time he first looked upon and watched his career
in Zion's Camp. And here, in Far West, his admiration and respect for
him personally, as well as for his calling, was heightened day by day.
We watched his intercourse with the people, and listened to his
preaching from the stand, with sentiments of profound respect and
pleasure. There was something in his manner, his countenance and spirit
that was not associated with mortal man that we had ever looked upon
before.

Sidney Rigdon was a fine-looking man, polished in address and powerful
in oratory; but he was far behind Joseph in the possession of those
magnetic powers of the mind which attracted the multitude, and chained
the attention of his auditors. In comparison, Rigdon's eloquence was
delightful, like the ripple of the merry brooklet that glides over its
pebbled bed or dashes down a narrow declivity; but the testimony of
Joseph struck through the heart, and, like the thunder of the cataract,
declared at once the dignity and matchless supremacy of the Creator.

There were various causes which produced dissatisfaction with the people
of the adjacent counties against us. In Caldwell and Daviess Counties we
were strongest at the polls and enabled to elect the men of our choice,
as is the right of American citizens everywhere. We elected to the
Legislature, John Corrill, a member of our Church. At the polls at
Gallatin our opponents tried to prevent our men from voting, by mob
force, but our brethren stood for their rights like men, and cast their
ballots. This took place at the August election of 1838.

On the 4th of July, 1838, the cornerstone for a temple was laid on the
public square at Far West. A liberty pole was erected and the stars and
stripes unfurled to the breeze. An address was delivered on that
occasion by Sidney Rigdon, to which our enemies took great exceptions,
and from which much excitement resulted in Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll
Counties.”

Mrs. Lucy Walker (Smith) Kimball:

“Father was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ in 1832; mother,
two years later. They left Vermont in 1834 for the west. They found a
small branch of the Church in Ogdensburg, New York; some of Brother
Kimball's first converts, preparing also to go west. My father was
induced to remain with this branch until 1837. During the year 1835, the
children who were eight years and upwards were baptized by Elder Abraham
Palmer. They were full of faith, having been taught to pray by their
parents, and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and the
signs followed them. Some spake in tongues, others prophesied; again
others had the gift of faith to heal the sick, etc.

One of this little band prophesied that before we reached our
destination we would be surrounded by armed mobs with blackened faces,
and would need much faith in God to endure the many persecutions and
trials before us, and that some of our number would lay down their
lives; others would see their brethren shot down before their very eyes.
This was verified at the wholesale slaughter at Haun's Mill.

Notwithstanding all this, we did not falter in our faith, but started on
our perilous journey trusting in God. We passed through Kirtland just
after the Saints had left for the far west. When we arrived in Caldwell
County we were surrounded by a mob of about forty persons with blackened
faces. They hooted and yelled and looked more like demons than human
beings. It was early one December morning when this occurred. They
ordered my poor, delicate mother out into the deep snow, searched our
wagons, took from us our arms and ammunition, pointed their guns at us
children to intimidate us, and cursed and swore in a most frightful
manner. One of the neighboring women had intruded her hateful presence
into our camp, urging them to shoot. "Shoot them down," she cried, "they
should not be allowed to live\!"

The question may be asked, how did we feel under these circumstances? I
can speak for one, I did not tremble--I did not fear them. They looked
to me too insignificant and I felt to trust in One, (although but a
child) who held our destinies in His own hands.

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

“I was born on the 9<sup>th</sup>, day of May A.D. 1818 in the county of
Fairfield, State of Ohio. I was but two years old when my father moved
to Wayne County. Of that early part of my life you have already read
something in the first chapter of this work. And perhaps I could not say
much more than I have already said that would be of interest to you
about it.

While my father lived on the Red Haw, a branch of the Wohegan—on the
Lease—of which I have already given an account—Came first to us the
sound of the Everlasting Gospel, as revealed to man in these last days.
It was the Gospel of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;
proclaimed by two elders, Thomas Tripp and Harvey Cross. I was then
about thirteen years old. My father, who previously had not felt to join
any Christian denomination, now opened his house, and welcomed the
elders to his home.

(1831) The first Sermons preached on the Red Haw, by elders of this
church, were preached in my father’s house in April 1831, by the above
named elders. Soon after, my father, Mother and Sister Isabelle were
baptized and confirmed members of the church, by the same elders.

(August 1833) My father sold the Lease; and in August 1833, accompanied
by brother Amos and his family, and James McMillen and family, started
to Jackson County Missouri to join with the Church. The Season being
well advanced, he was not able to get further than to Richland County
Ohio that season…

(June 1834) Having traveled about two months with ox teams, in the
latter part of June 1834 we arrived in Pike County Mo.

The church being very much scattered and unsettled, we remained in Pike
County about two years.

(1836) In the spring of 1836, the company above mentioned, moved to Ray
County, and there joined with a branch of the Church. We stopped there
about three months, during which time we suffered a great deal with ague
and fever.

The howling of the mob were heard of every side, and it was decided that
we should move to Caldwell Co.

In September, my father, taking with him what of his children yet
remained at home, and accompanied by James Dayley and wife, moved to
Caldwell County, and settled about three fourths of a mile from Haun’s
Mill on Shoal creek.

There, my father Entered from Government, eighty acres of Land and began
to make a home.

A branch of the church was organized at Haun’s mill, presided over by
David Evans.

(1838) I was baptized into the church of Jesus Christ of Latterday
Saints by David Evans, in June 1838. At the same time James Haun and
Isaac Laney were baptized.”

Days Before:

Ellis Eames  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/12594448>

“The next important transaction that took place was that a company was
raised on Grand River, but without any legal authority whatever and came
to our neighborhood and took a quantity of guns from our people. When
they came up to my place I immediately went up to them, conversed with
them and asked what was their object in the strange move they were
making. One of them named Molsey told me that they were taking the guns
from the Mormons, wanting to put a stop to the damned fuss. One young
man named Hiram Abbot who was with me, and with whom I was about making
arrangements to put up a store, who had a gun with him was told to give
up his gun, but he refused, knowing they had no authority for such
strange proceedings, when several of the mob while on their horses
immediately cocked their guns and took aim at him, but did not fire.

Three of them then dismounted viz: Hiram Comstock, Trosher, and Whitney
and pursued after him across the mill dam -- he got up to the side of a
hill and Comstock got by the side of the house, Comstock then drew up
his gun and snapped it three times at him, but without effect; his gun
would not make fire. Abbott seeing that, cocked his gun, but Comstock
got behind the hen house and screened himself from danger. Abbott then
made his escape as fast as possible. The mob then rode off. Very soon
after it was reported that they intended to come and burn the mills. On
receiving this intelligence the neighbors assembled together to consult
what was best to be done, and after some deliberations it was agreed
that there should a few remain at the mill to guard it from the attack
of any individuals who might feel disposed to put their threats into
execution, and from that time there were generally some of the men about
the mills in order to protect it, it being their chief and only place
where they could get any flour or meal…

We continued to hear of mobs in different directions, but at the same
time we felt ourselves measurable safe after being given to understand
by the committee from Capt. Mattison's company that they would not
molest us, if we were peaceable, etc.

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

Though many of the followers of the prophet Joseph Smith had been
beaten, tarred and feathered, driven from their homes and their property
confiscated for the use of mobocrats, their persecutions were not yet to
cease. Threats were made against the Mormons, the rights of Citizenship
were denied them.

The little few now fully realizing the dangerous situation in which they
were placed, decided to adopt measures to defend themselves against the
raids of the mob. It was decided that a guard should be kept at the
mill…

(October 30, 1838) One beautiful after-noon on the 30<sup>th</sup> day
of October 1838, my father came home from meeting with the brethren at
the mill. He talked with me, and told me the arrangements made. He was
called to help to form the guard. I was sick at the time, with the
every-other-day ague, and father said on my well day, I should take his
place with the guard and that he would guard on the day that I was sick.
That with himself and me, he wished to fill one man’s place. You will
remember my father was then in his sixty-third year. During the summer
he had been very sick—but having recovered, appeared to feel very well;
in fact I think he looked better than I had ever before saw him.

My sister Catherine was living at the mill with Hauns’ family. Leaving
only me and my youngest sister Dorcas, at home with father and mother.

Father was in good spirits, and his countenance wore a cheerful
expression. Having shaved himself in his usual style, leaving side
boards—and taking with him his gun and blankets, started on his return
to the mill to join the rest of the guard. Mother, with sister Dorcas
started to visit a neighbor woman, living about a quarter of a mile
distant from father’s place. This being the day on which I was sick, the
next day I should have taken father’s place with the guard. I was then
in my twenty first year.

The day was gradually passing—evening was coming on.

The large red Sun so characteristic of an Indian summer, shone through
the smokey atmosphere. All was still.

Massacre:

Mrs. Lucy Walker (Smith) Kimball:  
http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html

We continued our journey until we came to a settlement on Shoal Creek,
five miles distant from Haun's Mill; my father and another of the
brethren went to the mill to hold council, with Brother Joseph Young and
others, as to what course was best to pursue under the circumstances.
They were in a blacksmith shop when a mob appeared in sight, formed in
line and commenced firing, without giving any warning whatever, upon
men, women and children. The first ball fired by the enemy lodged in my
father's right arm. He returned the shot but found it impossible to
reload. He then ran down the bank of the creek, and just before him one
of the brethren in ascending the opposite bank, was shot down.

He stepped under some lumber leaning against the bank, which afforded
very little if any protection, but, in answer to prayer, their eyes were
blinded, and, although they looked directly at him, yet apparently did
not see him, passed on, declaring with an oath that not another Mormon
was to be seen. He remained there until all was silent, then ventured
forth to witness the dreadful scene of the massacre.

In the shop lay the lifeless body of the son of Warren Smith with his
brains beaten out with the breech of a gun, and another of the same
family with his thigh torn entirely away, and apparently mortally
wounded. A little further on an aged man, Father McBride, lay weltering
in his gore. It was not enough to shoot him down, but the murderers had
found an old scythe with which they had mangled that venerable head in a
most horrible and sickening manner.

A young woman was also found behind a huge log, where she had fallen in
a fainting condition with a wound in one of her hands, several bullet
holes through her clothing and a volley had lodged in the log. If a man
had on a good coat or a pair of good boots they were stripped from their
bodies in a most brutal and inhuman manner, while the victims were in
the agonies of death.

Willard Smith: Alexander L. Baugh: A Rare Account of the Haun’s Mill
Massacre 167  
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/11-MHS_2007_Willard-GIlbert-Smith-Hauns-Mill-Massacre.pdf>

“With my two younger brothers, I was at the blacksmith shop with Father
when without warning a large body of mounted men with faces blackened or
painted like Indians rode up yelling and commenced shooting into the
group. The men at the shop called for “quarters” but the mob paid no
attention, continuing to shoot. The men then shouted to their wives to
take the children and run for their lives.

We were surrounded on three sides by the mob, and the old mill and the
millpond were on the other. The men ran for the shop, taking the little
boys with them. My two little brothers ran with Father. But when I tried
to enter the shop, my arms flew up and braced themselves against each
side of the door, preventing my entrance. In my frenzy of fear, I again
tried to enter the shop, and again my arms were braced to prevent my
going in. After a third futile attempt, I ran around the corner of the
shop and crawled into a pile of lumber, hiding as best I could.

Immediately, the mob began shooting at me and the splintered lumber flew
all around. I crawled out and ran into an empty house on the slope near
the pond. Here I found an old Revolutionary Soldier, Father McBride,3
who had been wounded and had crawled into a potato cellar under the
floor of the house. Although I warned \[him\] that the mob would find
and kill him, he begged for a drink of water and to be helped out of the
cellar. I them went to the millpond to get him some water and was
deliberately fired upon, the bullets spattering in the water like hail.
I escaped without a scratch. (The mob did find this aged Veteran, and as
he raised his hands in supplication for mercy, they were hacked and the
fingers split down by a dull corn cutter.)

I made the old gentleman as comfortable as possible and as the bullets
were flying thickly around us, I ran from this house into another one
close by. Here I heard sobs and whispered comfortings, and lifting the
valance around the bed, I found six little girls huddled in fear. As the
bullets had followed me into this house, I said to the little girls:
“Come we must get out of here or we will all be killed.” So we ran to
the millrace which we crossed on a board reaching the woods on the other
side of the pond—with the mob shooting at us all the way.

After our race for life, the little girls scurried off like prairie
chickens into the brush and tall corn. Knowing that my father and two
brothers were in the shop with the mob still firing, I took shelter
behind a large tree where I could watch the activities of the mob with
comparative safety. Finally, they ceased firing, dismounted, and went
into the shop where they finished killing any whom they thought were not
dead. From there, they went into all the cabins and tents destroying or
taking groceries and furnishings. Then after taking all the horses
belonging to their victims, they rode off howling like Indians.

Amanda Barnes Smith  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/1781809>

…my husband, Warren Smith, in company with several other families were
moving from the State of Ohio to Missouri when we were traveling,
minding our own business, we were stopped by a mob of armed men, they
told us if we went another step they would kill us all, they took our
guns from us, as we were going into a new country we took guns with us.
They took us back five miles, placed a guard around us, kept us there
three days and let us go. We traveled on ten miles, came to a small town
composed of one grist saw mill, eight or ten houses all belonging to the
saints, our brothers, there we stopped for the night. A little before
sunset a mob of three hundred armed men came upon us, our men called for
the women and children to run for the woods while they ran into an old
blacksmith shop, for they feared if we all ran together they would rush
upon us and kill men, women and children. The mob fired upon us before
we had time to start from our camp, our men took off their hats and
swung them and cried quarters until they were shot down, the mob paid no
attention to their cries nor their entreaties but fired alternately.

I took my little girls, my boys I could not find, and ran for the woods,
the mob encircled us in on all sides excepting the bank of the creek so
I ran down the bank and crossed the mill pond on a plank, ran up the
hill on the other side into the bushes. The bullets whistled by me like
hail stones and cut down the bushes on all sides of me. One girl was
wounded by my side and she fell over a log and her clothes happened to
hang over the log in site of the mob and the mob fired at them,
supposing them to be her body; (after all was still, our people cut out
of that log twenty bullets.)

I saw down to witness the awful scene; when they had done firing they
began to howl and one would have thought all the infernos had come up
from the lower regions. They plundered the principle part of our goods,
they took our horses and wagons and ran off howling like demons. After
they had gone I came down to witness and behold the awful scene and Oh,
Oh, horrible, what a sight\!

My husband and one son ten years old lay lifeless upon the ground and
one son six years old wounded very bad, his hip all shot off and to
pieces, the ground all covered with the dead and dying. There were three
little boys crept under the blacksmith's bellows, one of them re­ceived
three wounds, he lived three weeks and died, he was not mine, the other
two were and one of them had his brains all shot out and the other his
hip shot to pieces. Realize, my readers, for a moment the scene. Nothing
but horror and distress; it was sunset, the dogs were filled with rage,
howling over their dead masters, the cattle caught the scent of innocent
blood and bellowed, a dozen helpless widows, thirty or forty orphaned or
fatherless children screaming and grieving for the loss of their
husbands and fathers, the groans of the dying and wounded, all of this
put together was enough to melt the heart of anything but a Missouri
mob.

There was fifteen dead and ten wounded, two died next day, there were no
men, or not enough, to bury the dead so they were thrown into an old
well that was dry and covered them with straw and dirt. The next day the
mob came back and told us we must leave the state or they would kill us
all. It was cold weather, they had our teams and our clothes, our men
all dead or wounded, I told them they might kill me and my children in
welcome. They sent word from time to time that if we did not leave the
state they would come and make a breakfast of us. We had little prayer
meetings, they said if we did not stop them they would kill every man,
woman and child. We had spelling schools for our little children, they
said if we did not stop they would kill us all. We done our own milling,
got our own wood, no man to help us.

I started the first of February for the State of Illinois without money,
mobbed all the way, I drown my own team, slept out of doors. I had four
small children, we suffered much with hunger, cold and fatigue, for
what? For our religion, where in a bossed land of liberty deny your
faith or die, was the cry. I will mention some of the leading men of
this mob: two brothers by the name of Crumstock, William Man, Benjamin
Ashby, Robert White and one by the name of Rogers, who took an old
scythe and cut an old White headed revolutioner all to pieces.

Back to autobiography:

I would further state that my husband was stript of his clothes before
he was dead, he had a new pair of calf-skin boots taken off his feet by
Bill Man. He made his brags that he pulled a damned Mormon's boots off
his feet before he was done kicking. The mob went and shot the men over
for fear they were not dead. I saw one of the mob afterwards and asked
him what they intended when they came there? He said they intended to
kill everything that breathed. I will leave it to this honorable
government to say why my damages shall be, what they would have their
fathers, mothers wives and children shot for..

Ellis Eames  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/12594448>

On the 31st of October things moved on as usual, we were occupied in our
usual occupations and heard of nothing to increase our fears and were in
hopes that soon such proceedings and alarm would cease and we should
again enjoy the blessings of liberty and peace. The day was far spent;
the sun was sinking fast in the western hemisphere, being only about an
hour and a half high. A number of us where at a short distance from the
mill between it and the blacksmith's shop when one observed there was a
mob coming, and immediately we saw a large company of between 200 and
250 within about one hundred yards from us. Thinking their movements
were hostile, we immediately ran into the blacksmith's shop, for safety.
Some of our brethren had camped a little behind the shop; one of them by
the name of Knight, had just taken up his gun and was going down to the
small lake for the purpose of shooting ducks when the mob came upon him.
One of their leaders named Comstock observing him immediately fired upon
him and shot the strap off his shot pouch. He then ran into the shop
whither we had taken shelter, the mob then kept rushing on towards the
shop and shooting at us. David Evans then ran out and called for peace
and solicited them to desist. Knight also went out again and joined him
supplicating for peace, but all to no effect; they continued to fire
upon them and shot Brother Knight in the hand, taking off one finger and
disabling another, he then retreated towards the mill to cross on the
dam, when he was shot in the back, the ball lodging in the pit of his
stomach.

The women seeing our situation and expecting no better treatment took to
flight, taking their little ones along with them and running away from a
scene of murder, which it is impossible to portray. As the mob
approached nearer the shop, (indeed if we had all been armed it would
have been impossible for us to have resisted them) took deliberate aim
through the cracks and the shop being crowded almost every ball that
entered the shop took effect and every moment some one was exclaiming,
"Oh, I am shot," and first one and then another kept sinking down upon
the ground, writhing in agony, while the blood flowed from their wounds
and steamed upon the floor. One young man standing immediately next to
me was shot, seeing no prospect before us but death, the mob manifesting
all malice possible, and would not listen to our cries, and seemed
determined to murder us all, we thought it advisable for us to try to
make our escape by running out of the shop and cross the mill dam. Those
of us who were able ran out and endeavored to make our escape in doing
which as many were shot down while making the attempt and the mob firing
upon us all the time as long as we were within reach. The mob then
rushed into the shop where the wounded and dying were laying and those
in whom the spark of life was not extinct were then shot over again. A
little boy about nine years old who had hid himself under the bellows
being observed and on being threatened to be shot, he earnestly desired
and prayed for them to spare him, plead for his life, but to no purpose,
for a muzzle shot gun was placed to his head and his brains were
literally blown out, another little boy was likewise shot and died soon
after, still another was shot, but has survived. One old gentleman who
was immediately behind, named Thos. McBride, Esq., ran when we fled from
the shop and was pursued, having a gun in his hand. This was demanded by
his pursuer, he immediately turned round and delivered it up. The
monster then took a corn cutter which he had by his side and cut the old
man into pieces.

Some of the women were shot. Mrs. Merril's clothes were cut in two or
three places with bullets and a young woman named Mary Studwell who was
running away, at a distance from any one else was shot through the hand.
Hearing the balls whistling by her she took shelter behind some logs
which screened her from the balls as several lodged in the logs.

After they had finished their bloody work, the mob next commenced to
plunder, and seeing some teams standing by belonging to the movers who
had lately come along, they loaded the wagons with our goods. They
entirely stripped me of all my clothing as well as my wife's and the
clothes belonging to a young man who was boarding at our house, and all
our bed clothes and beds likewise a quantity of merchandise which they
carried away. Nor did this satisfy them, but those who were murdered
were then robbed of their clothes, watches and everything else of value.
The mobbers took their booty to Grand River and there made a
distribution of the spoils amongst themselves.

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

My father had but little more than got to the mill—in fact not more than
thirty minutes had elapsed from the time he left the house, when a gun
was heard\!—and another\!—followed by the deadly crack of musketry,
which told too well the fate of all who fell a prey to the
b\[l\]ood-thirsty mob\!

Perhaps not more than six minutes had passed from the firing of the
first gun, ‘till the massacre was accomplished,--the bloody deed was
done.

The firing ceased—The Screams of Mothers, daughters and the wounded,
told the dreadful tale\!

That b\[l\]oody picture in the book of time; May it ever stamp with
stigma the brow of that Government that offered not a protecting hand to
those who were ruthlessly cut down—wounded; or made widows, and orphans,
at the Haun’s Mill Massacre.

The Sun slowly sank be-neath the Western Horizon:--and darkness spread
its broad mantle over the universe.

Aftermath:

Willard Smith: Alexander L. Baugh: A Rare Account of the Haun’s Mill
Massacre 167  
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/11-MHS_2007_Willard-GIlbert-Smith-Hauns-Mill-Massacre.pdf>

As soon as I was sure they had gone, I started for the shop and was the
first person to enter this holocaust, stepping over the dead body of my
Father in doing so. I looked around and found by brother Sardis dead
with the entire top of his head shot away, and my brother Alma almost
lifeless lying among a pile of dead where he had been thrown by the
mobsters who, evidently, thought him dead. I picked up Alma from the
dirt and was carrying him from the shop when I met my Mother who
screamed: “They have killed my little Alma.” I replied: “No mother, but
Father and Sardis are dead.” I begged her not to enter the shop but to
help me with Alma.

Our tent had been looted, even the ticking cut and straw strewn about.
Mother leveled the straw and covered it with some clothing and on this
awful bed we placed Alma, cutting off his pants to determine the extent
of his injury. After placing Alma on this improvised bed, my mother,
Amanda Barnes Smith, a woman of dauntless courage and implicit faith in
her Heavenly Father, found that the entire ball and socket of the left
hip had been shot away leaving the bones about three or four inches
apart. As soon as Alma was conscious, Mother asked him if he thought the
Lord could make him another new hip, and he replied that if she thought
he could, then he, too, believed it could be done. Then she called her
remaining three children around the bed, and they knelt and supplicated
the Lord for faith and guidance. Mother dedicated Alma to the Lord,
praying that he be restored and made well and strong, but if this were
not possible, to take him in his innocence. This picture of my Mother’s
implicit faith in her Heavenly Father remained as a living testimony to
her children through their lives.

In her terrible sorrow and bereavement, her only help could come from
divine guidance. By inspiration, her prayers were answered and she knew
what to do. First she was directed to take the ashes from a fireplace
and made a mild lye solution with which she bathed the gaping wound
until it was as white as the breast of a chicken, with all the mangled
flesh and bone gone. Then she prayed for further guidance and was
prompted to take the roots from the slippery elm tree and made poultices
for application. She asked me if I had seen any elm trees, and I replied
that there were some on the banks of the stream feeding the millpond.

By this time, dark had descended upon this tragic scene, and when my
Mother asked if I could take a shovel and get some of the roots, you can
appreciate the terror which gripped my heart as an eleven-year old
child. However, Mother assured me that the Lord would protect me and
with a lighted torch of Shag-bark Hickory, I began by search.

Women and children were lamenting loss of husbands, fathers, and
children; dogs were howling, and the cattle smelling fresh blood were
bellowing, and no one could know how many mobocrats lurked in the
menacing shadows. It required all the courage I could summon to take the
shovel, and with the aid of a dim torch, follow the stream and secure
the roots from which Mother made a soothing poultice. The story of the
miraculous healing of Alma’s hip has been related many times, but few
realize the constant terror of the stricken family, unable to leave the
State as Alma could not be moved because of his injured hip; yet they
were repeatedly warned that if they did not leave, they would be killed.

They were forbidden to call the family together for prayers or even to
pray vocally alone. This Godless silence, Mother said, she could not
stand, so one day, she went down into a corn field and crawled into a
shock of the corn which had been cut. After carefully ascertaining that
no one was within hearing distance, she said she “Prayed till her soul
felt satisfied.” As she left the shock of corn, although there was no
one in sight, she plainly heard a voice repeating these words:

“That soul who on Jesus hath leaned for repose I cannot—I I will not
desert to it foes. That soul, ’though all hell should endeavor to shake,
I’ll never, no never, no never forsake.”

Amanda Barnes Smith  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/1781809>

I felt the loss of my husband but not as I should if he had apostatized,
he died in the faith and in hopes of a glorious resurrection. As for
myself, I felt an unshaken confidence in God through it all. I had been
personally acquainted with the prophet Joseph for many years, had seen
his walks and knew him to a Prophet of God, that boyed me up under every
trial and privation.

I would further state that Sardis my second son was killed when his
father was - he was ten years old. Alma had his hip shot off, the entire
hip joint and socket gone leaving the point of the bone about three or
four inches apart, besides the bones badly fractured, pieces worked out
for three months. I knew, naturally, he must be a cripple but I knew
that the same God that formed the first bone could form another,
consequently I dedicated him to the Lord, did the best I could for him
myself, had no doctor. I laid him on a soft bed and let him lie five
weeks and never moved him in that time, the Lord formed a new joint, as
good as the old one, and he ran and lept: like an hart and danced like a
top and is not a cripple.

Willard my first born when about twelve years old was thrown from a
horse and taken for dead. Men ran a half mile then carried him a half
mile before there was any appearance of life but by the power of the
priesthood was brought to life. His skull was badly cracked, his brain
injured, he did not know anything for some days but he got well and his
senses as good as ever. When Alma was about two years old he had the
sore eyes, he was blind for about three months, a thick film grew over
both eyes which was taken off by the prayer of faith in an instant so
that there was no weakness and they are perfectly well. Besides numerous
other healings and great manifestations of the Power of God I have
witnessed in my own family for which I thank and praise my Heavenly
Father for it is His mercy, not any worth or worthiness in me, but to
Him be all the glory, honor, both now and forever. Amen. /s/ Amanda
Smith.”

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

With a single exception, the dead were left lying where they fell—In
fact there were none left that were able to take care of them. Whether
dead or alive, all fared alike—all was uncertainty—all was pain and
sorrow.

In vain did the affectionate wife with aching heart and streaming eyes
watch through the long, long night for the return of her husband.

(October 31, 1838) The 31<sup>st</sup> day dawned, and again the rays of
the morning sun, kissed the land-scape. As yet the extent of the
massacre was not known.

Brother Amos having been detailed on the previous day to get wood for
families, was on his way to the mill when he was told there had been
serious trouble there. His home was about three miles from the mill, and
as he was not detailed on guard, was not at the mill at the time of the
slaughter.

He went on; and passing the mill a short distance, came to Haun’s house.
The first object that met his eye in human form, was the mangled body of
my murdered father, lying in the door yard.

He had been shot with his own gun, after having given it into the mobs
possession. Was cut down and badly disfigured with a corn cutter, and
left lying in the creek.

Some of the women had dragged him from the creek into the door yard and
left him there. One of his ears was almost cut from his head—deep gashes
were cut in his shoulders; and some of his fingers cut till they would
almost drop from his hand.

On further examination it was found that fifteen were murdered, and
fifteen wounded—one of whom was a woman, Mary Stedwell, who in trying to
escape, was shot through the hand, and fell behind a log. Several bullet
holes were found in the log, directly opposite of where she lay.

Alma Smith a small boy; and I believe one \_\_\_\_\_Marrick were the
only wounded children that were yet alive.

Of the wounded men, three afterward died. Making eighteen dead in all.

Isaac Laney a young man that was baptized into the church at the same
time that I was, was in the black-smith shop, when the mob began to fire
on them. His gun stock was shot to pieces in his hands. He then escaped
from the shop, ran to the mill, and climbed down one of the mill timbers
into the creek. That being the quickest way for him to escape, danger.
From there he went into the house, where Sister Catherine, Mrs. Haun,
Mrs. Merril and some other women were. They administered to Isaac, and
put him under the floor. He had received eleven bullet marks in his
body. I was well acquainted with Isaac Laney, and helped to take care of
him until he recovered. He told me that when trying to escape from the
mob, the blood gushing from his mouth would almost strangle him. While
he was under the floor he said he suffered a great deal for want of
water. The women not daring to venture out to get water until they felt
sure the mob was entirely gone.

Isaac recovered, and lived thirty-five years from the day of the Haun’s
Mill Massacre.”

Mrs. Lucy Walker (Smith) Kimball:  
http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html

My father aided in dressing the wounds of those worse off than himself
and to bury the dead as best he could with his left hand. His own arm
was not cared for or scarcely thought of, in the midst of the terrible
suffering of others, until it was in danger of mortifying. Besides, the
country was in such a state of excitement, he had to hide from place to
place, and came near losing his arm. Two weeks later he rejoined his
family, pale and emaciated. My brother William had gone in search,
having learned that his life had been spared, but was wounded. These two
weeks were full of the keenest anxiety.

On the night of this fearful slaughter, a young man came running through
the woods and deep snow, bare headed, telling us that an armed mob had
surrounded those at the mill, and were murdering men, women and
children, and would soon be upon us. This news caused a regular stampede
in our little company, as some of our company had gone to the mill. Some
of the women took their little ones in their arms, while others clung to
their clothes; a loaf of bread and a blanket or two, were carried by
older members of the family, and all rushed deeper into the snow and
adjacent timber. Mother pleaded in vain for all to remain in camp, as
there would be no possible safety in such a flight. The cries of the
famishing children would betray them, besides they could have no fire,
as this too would attract the attention of the mob.

My mother and Sister Davis (whose husband had died enroute, and whose
loss was deeply mourned by all), remained in camp, called their children
together, prayed with them, soothed their fears, and assured them that
the same God whose watchcare had been over us during our journey thus
far, was our friend still and would protect us. We went to bed feeling
that we were safe, and God was our friend; but when the morning dawned
and I looked into my mother's pale face, I was positive she had not
closed her eyes, and felt, child as I was, almost guilty that I had
suffered myself to be lulled to sleep by her magic words of comfort,
while she had kept a vigilant watch during that fearful night of keenest
anxiety. Those who left camp returned exhausted and almost famished.

Early next morning a fine looking young officer rode into camp, and said
he had come as a friend to save us from the fate of those at the mill.
He referred to the dreadful scene with words of sympathy and regret. He
said he was forced to join the military to save his own life, but had
done and would do all in his power to save the oppressed. If we would
follow him, he would lead us to a place of safety, to a friendly
neighborhood, where we would find shelter from the cold storms of
winter. We followed him, and here was where my father found us. James
Flanagan, the young missionary who died with smallpox in England in
1848, was one of our company. He was an exemplary young man; in fact, an
exception among men. His zeal for the cause of truth was unexcelled.

We left the state of Missouri in 1838 and went with the Saints to
Quincy, Illinois, and to Nauvoo in 1841.”

Ellis Eames  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/12594448>

I went about two miles and hid in the Hazel brush and then returned with
Mr. Blackburn about ten O'clock at night. I went amongst my friends who
had been shot, and those who had been wounded, I assisted all I could
and administered to their necessities, and early in the morning a few of
us got together and interred the dead in a hole which had been dug for a
well, and then we went and hid in the hazel brush, expecting the mob
would probably be coming to massacre the remainder. Some came, but they
did not appear so hostile, but satisfied themselves with carrying off 2
or 3 horses. A few days after the same company came and pretended that
General Clark had sent them to take prisoners and send them to Richmond
jail. They took me prisoner and kept me in close confinement for nine
days and would not let me converse with any one. They then took
possession of my mills and ground up all the wheat and corn and took it
home to their families and after taking about all the spoil they could
and killed nearly all my hogs, they departed and left me at liberty and
drove off the cattle, etc. They went all around the neighborhood and
threatened the lives of all the Mormons and ordered them out of the
state upon pain of extermination…

These acted without any authority and committed all these murders, and
robberies, yet none of them have been brought to punishment. The affair
was left without investigation and the poor afflicted broken-hearted
survivors left without any redress.”

Days Following:

Willard Smith: Alexander L. Baugh: A Rare Account of the Haun’s Mill
Massacre 167  
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/11-MHS_2007_Willard-GIlbert-Smith-Hauns-Mill-Massacre.pdf>

From that moment Mother said she had no further fear of the mob, and she
inspired us children with faith that if we conscientiously did right,
the Lord would shelter us from harm. Although Alma lay in the same
position for five weeks while the wound was healing, strength seemed to
come to the limb suddenly. One day, when Mother was carrying a bucket of
water from the spring, she was alarmed to hear the children screaming in
the house. She rushed through the door to see them all running about the
room with Alma in lead, crying “I’m well, Ma, I’m well\!” Something had
grown in to take the place of the missing ball and socket, and he was
able to use the limb with no inconvenience. Although it was necessary in
later years to pad the side of his trousers, he never suffered any pain
or discomfort, although he filled a mission in the Sandwich Islands
where he did a great deal of walking.

As soon as Alma was well enough that we could plan to leave Missouri,
great difficulties presented themselves, one being that our horses had
been confiscated by the mob. Finally, I went with Mother to Captain
Comstock, leader of the mob, and she demanded the horses, one of which
was in the field. He said we might have the animal by paying $5.00 for
its feed bill. This Mother could not do as all her money had been stolen
by the mob. I admired her courage when she walked out into the field and
tying her apron around the horse’s neck, led it home with no further
objections”

This is how Stephen LeSueur recounts the situation in “The 1838 Mormon
War in Missouri”:

“No one knows who ordered the attack on Haun’s Mill. The militia
companies that participated in the assault belonged to General Parks’s
brigade, but he did not issue the order. The troops organized under the
command of Col. Thomas Jennings, who apparently acted on his own
initiative in leading the attack. It is possible that the Missourians
received word of Governor Boggs’s extermination order and took it upon
themselves to carry out the decree, but they never offered this as a
reason for the raid. One of the attackers, Charles Ashby, a state
legislator from Livingston, said the Missourians attacked because Mormon
dissenters fleeing into Livingston warned them that the Saints at Haun’s
Mill were planning an invasion of their county. Local citizens decided
they must act to prevent Mormon soldiers from overrunning Livingston as
they had Daviess…

The Mormons at Haun’s mill were not planning an attack upon Livingston
settlers. They had set guards around the village but because of their
recent treaty they were not expecting an attack. The Missouri troops
were first seen as they emerged from the woods about one hundred yards
from the village. The Mormons, who were simply going about their daily
tasks, did not react with alarm, but stared cautiously as the
Missourians formed into three companies for their attack. Many of the
Saints thought the troops were reinforcements from Far West. Captain
Comstock fired his rifle into the air, after which ten seconds of
silence followed. During the silence—described by Joseph Young as a
“solemn pause”—the Mormons began slowly to grasp the meaning of the
soldiers’ appearance as they anxiously searched for wives, husbands,
children, and the nearest shelter. The Missouri troops raised their
guns, and with a thunderous roar broke the spell of silence by firing at
the Mormon villagers.

As soon as the shooting started, David Evans, the commander of the small
militia force at Haun’s Mill, ran to the center of the village, waved
his hat, and yelled for quarter. So did a number of other Mormons, but
the Missouri troops ignored their appeals and continued firing. Mothers
frantically gathered their children and fled into the woods. A rifle
ball pierced Mary Stedwell’s hand as she attempted to jump a log. Her
dress caught the log, and she fell over it, protected, as another twenty
balls peppered the fallen tree. Fifteen men and three boys ran into a
blacksmith shop, where the Mormons had previously determined to fight if
they were attacked. They thought the shop would provide a shelter from
which to defend the village, and their brief stand doubtless saved the
lives of their fleeing neighbors because they attracted most of the
Missourians’ fire. But the shop also became a deathtrap, for the
Missourians’ musket balls easily passed through the large, unchinked
cracks between the logs of the shop’s walls.

Inside the shop the three boys crawled under the bellows for safety
while the men frantically loaded, fired, reloaded, and fired again. The
Missourians poured round after round into the shop while the Mormons’
fire proved entirely ineffective as one-by-one the Mormon men fell. The
Missourians slowly advanced toward the shop until they simply shoved
their muskets through the logs and fired into the crowd of bodies. David
Lewis attempted to fire through an open window, but, as he raised his
gun, saw a Missourian preparing to fire. Lewis ducked just as another
Mormon, stepping to the window to fire his musket, was shot in the face.
Eventually, the crush of the Missourians’ guns through the shop walls
was so great that the defenders could not return fire, but could only
desperately parry and dodge as the Missourians continued firing into the
shop.

About half the Mormon men had fallen when Captain Evans ordered the rest
to flee, but most of them were cut down as they ran the gauntlet of
soldiers. Thomas McBride, a sixty-two-year-old Mormon who was wounded as
he ran from the shop, surrendered his gun when the Missourians came upon
him. Jacob Rogers, who ran a ferry in Daviess County, took McBride’s
loaded gun and discharged it into the old man’s breast. Rogers then
hacked at McBride with a scythe until his body was mangled from head to
foot. Isaac Leany, after having the breach of his rifle shot off,
crawled through a window and ran for the woods. He received two shots in
the chest, one in the hip, and one in each arm before reaching the
safety of the brush. His clothes were torn to shreds by a dozen other
balls that grazed his body. Inside the blacksmith shop the Missourians
found ten-year-old Sardius Smith hiding under the bellows. Young Smith,
whose father lay mortally wounded on the floor, begged for his life, but
William Reynolds of Livingston County put a gun to the boy’s head and
blew off the top. “Nits will make lice, and if he had lived he would
have become a Mormon,” Reynolds reportedly said in justification of his
act. After the firing ceased, some of the Missourians looted the homes
and bodies of the Saints—several of the wounded were stripped as they
feigned death—and then rode off. The Missourians suffered three wounded
in the attack…

Bodies lay scattered throughout the village: eighteen had been killed or
mortally wounded, twelve to fifteen others wounded. All but one were men
or boys. The floor of the blacksmith’s shop was almost entirely covered
by a pool of blood. The women who came back the night of the massacre
tended to the wounded, but left most of the dead where they had fallen…

A few of the men returned the next day, but, fearing the Missourians
would attack, did not take time to bury the dead. Instead, they helped
the women gather the bodies, frozen stiff, and threw them into an old
well, some feet first, others head first, after which they filled in the
well with dirt and straw. Although some of the women stayed to care for
the wounded, most of the men fled back into the woods for safety after
they disposed of the dead.

The messenger who brought news of the attack to Far West did not know
how many had been killed or wounded; he could only report that the
Missourians had overrun Haun’s Mill and massacred a great number of its
inhabitants.”

<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/390333>  
“Following are the names of the killed or mortally wounded Thomas
McBride, Levi N. Merrick, Elias Benner, Joseph Fuller, Benjamin Lewis,
Alexander Campbell, Warren Smith, George S. Richards, William Napier,
Austin Hammer, Simon Cox, Hyrum Abbott, John York, John Lee, John Byers,
Sardius Smith and Charles Merrick. Among the wounded who recovered were
Issac Laney, Nathan K. Knight, William Yokum, Jacob Myers, George Myers,
Tarlton Lewis, Jacob Haun (founder and owner of the mill), Jacob Foutz,
Jacob Ports, Charles Jimison, John Walker, Alma L. Smith, Miss Mary
Stedwall and two others.”

Haun’s Mill Massacre has served to be the quintessential moment of
Mormon persecution, second only to Joseph’s claimed martyrdom 7 years in
the future from this time. No level of historiography or reading
first-hand accounts will truly enlighten us as to what this fateful day
must have been like for the people actually experiencing it. Some of the
details are a bit muddy, the exact sequence of events is a bit fluid
depending on who’s telling the story, but one thing remains objectively
true, this was a tragedy. This was truly a lapse in humanity, a blight
which infected the Missourians, causing them to commit this heinous
aberration from basic human empathy.

How did we get here? It took us 48 episodes to do it, but I’m still at a
loss to truly comprehend such a detestable abomination committed against
these people. These past few weeks compiling the necessary research for
this episode have been…. Emotionally draining to say the least. In a
stupor of inspiration, I decided to watch a clip from “Joseph Smith: The
Prophet of the Restoration,” the Joseph Smith movie that used to play in
the Legacy theatre, because they depict this scene at the 35-minute
mark; and by minute 37, the massacre is over. They don’t provide any
insight. They don’t even give us the slightest inkling to the sequence
of events leading to this day, which only serves to further reinforce
this relentless religious persecution narrative. They don’t even let us
in on why Joseph and Emma left Kirtland for Missouri in the first place,
it’s just a standalone incident with no explanation.

I guess I would simply like to point out that this would have been a
good time for Joseph to use his prophetic proclivities to know the
situation before it occurred. I guess that’s the problem when it comes
to a prophet, they seem to know everything concerning god’s will and how
to best fulfill such a concept, but when it comes to useful knowledge,
like how to save the lives of 18 of his parishioners, God simply forgot
to mention it to Joseph? Joseph’s god did help the Mormons as much as
his god had a hand in everything else Joseph did, which, I would argue,
it could be concluded Joseph’s god is absentee at best, and vindictive
at worst.

Everything that happened here was simply humans interacting with other
humans. Neither of these groups were sanctioned by God as his chosen
people. Joseph didn’t suddenly develop supernatural fire-breathing
powers and burn away their persecutors. This situation is exactly what
we would expect when humans persecute other humans.

This was a major lapse in judgement on the part of everybody involved
directly or indirectly. Colonel Thomas Jennings was the CO of this
specific militia while Comstock, Ashby, and a few others were
sub-commanding officers under Jennings’ direction. General Parks wasn’t
aware of these actions even though Jennings was under his personal
command, but should have removed and court martialed every single one of
those 250 men for what they did at Haun’s mill. Every man involved in
the militia should never have done what they did. Jacob Haun and the
other settlers at the mill should have heeded the warnings of mobs and
abandoned Haun’s mill for Far West days before. Thomas McBride should
never have given up his gun to only be shot with it seconds later. David
Evans should have commanded the Mormon militia to form a firing line to
answer the militia, or at least decided upon a more strategic fort than
a blacksmith shop with gun barrel-sized cracks in the wall to hold up
in. Joseph Smith should have been more insistent when he called the
Mormons from Haun’s mill to flee to Far West, as opposed to telling them
to do whatever they saw fit. The truth of the matter is, Haun’s mill was
the perfect storm.

I’ve been trying to quantify how things arrived to this point, and it’s
not simple. I’ve come up with a list of ­­­10 factors that caused this
situation to explode, some of which we’ve discussed at varying lengths
in the past, but many bear repeating, if only for a brief mention.

1: Joseph Smith. He was a charismatic and polarizing person and often
acted with little regard for how his actions might affect the future. As
we heard from Lyman Littlefield, Rigdon was a great orator, but Joseph
struck through the heart. Those who loved him would willingly die for
him, those who hated him would willingly kill those who followed him.
His sheer lack of experience with any wartime strategies made him a
terrible leader in this situation, making mistake after mistake and
never acting proactively in anticipation of the next problem.

2: Sidney Rigdon. Rigdon was a complicated piece of the Mormon
leadership puzzle. Quite a significant number of the Mormons living in
Far West or migrating from Kirtland and outer lying areas had been
Rigdonites for years before they were baptized into Mormonism. Some of
the people killed at Haun’s Mill only converted to Mormonism after
Rigdon had, but they’d spent more than the last decade listening to
Rigdon pound the pulpit and rant about Zion being restored to the
American Continent. On the flipside of that relationship, many of these
people suffering and starving as refugees in Missouri had been Rigdon’s
close friends for decades; a flock he’d been tasked with keeping safe.
But, before Joseph came along, Rigdon suffered his fair share of
persecution from followers and peers; he was tired of everything he and
his parishioners had endured and his frustrations finally came to a head
at the 4<sup>th</sup> of July Oration, what we called the Red Sermon.
The language Governor Boggs had employed in his extermination order were
directly taken from this sermon where Rigdon claimed the Mormons would
wage a war of extermination upon the Missourians. If not for this
vitriolic rhetoric, things may never have escalated to this point.

3: Governor Lilburn Boggs. The entire Mormon situation in Missouri had
been incredibly taxing on Boggs’ political career since the Mormons
began moving to Jackson County back in 1831. It wasn’t popular with the
Missourians to side with the Mormons, and there were enough Mormons
living in Missouri by mid-1838 to properly influence elections, as is
every American’s constitutionally sanctioned right. Boggs attempted to
balance his career on a knife edge, but did so by handling the situation
at an arms-length. In defiance of multiple requests from multiple state
militia officials to make a personal appearance, Boggs’ apathy to get
properly entrenched in the conflict and journey to Far West to converse
with Joseph himself was a heavily contributing cause. Generals Atchison,
Parks, Bogart, Joseph Smith, Lyman Wight all petitioned Boggs at some
point and level to show up in person to diffuse the situation; every
request for interference was blatantly ignored or outright refused.

4: Real Estate. Since the Mormons began settling in Missouri in 1831,
they were working and living on credit. Most of Missouri was rather
undesirable land with very little civilization once the Natives were
removed. The government offered great incentives for people to settle
these new lands and the Mormons capitalized as best they could. This led
to them being removed to Caldwell and Daviess Counties in 1833, where
they continued to live on borrowed resources. Whether in Ohio, Missouri,
New York, or Illinois, Mormons weren’t known for paying their tab. One
can only default on so much credit before creditors inevitably wage war
at some level to foreclose on the Mormon settlements.

5: Kirtland Safety Society anti-Bank-ing company. The Mormons were
paying for goods and land with counterfeit money or meaningless “I owe
you” agreements. The leadership had created their own false economy in
Kirtland only months before fleeing to Missouri to escape murder
conspiracies orchestrated by those who’d been burned. That counterfeit
money culminating with the panic of 1837 caused a lot of hard feelings
amidst a resource vacuum. Mormons and non-Mormons alike had been hurt by
the Kirtland Safety Society

6: Refugee Crisis. The collapse of the KSS company and the subsequent
fleeing of the leadership to Missouri left thousands of helpless Mormons
in Ohio with nothing more than a commandment to move to Missouri as soon
as they could, or desert Joseph and become an apostate. Many of these
people moved with barely more than the clothes on their back. In
addition to those moving from Ohio, a small influx of poor Mormons from
Canada and Europe only further strained the already scarce resources.

7: Resource Vacuum. All the economic pressures caused a resource vacuum.
Many of the Mormons fleeing Ohio were simply leaving their crops in the
ground and selling their property and crops at rock-bottom prices, only
to move to Missouri too late in the year to get any crops in the ground.
When that many people who typically farm simply lose a year or two of
work to the circumstances, it makes for billions of calories never
planted, harvested, or consumed. Mass starvation was a harsh reality
with which every Mormon living in Missouri had to contend.

8: Mormon Depredations. In response to said resource vacuum, Joseph
“became a second Mohammet to this generation” and the Mormons looted
and burned the non-Mormon villages in Daviess county. But, given the
sequence of events which led them there, they had little other option
than stealing the needed calories to survive the harsh Missouri winter
that lay ahead. Missourians refused to do business with the Mormons, and
often times when they ventured away from the sanctuary cities, the
Missouri mobs would arrest and detain the Mormons or steal their
property. They were hungry and stuck with options running out.

9: Politics. Just as it was corrosive to Boggs’ political career to
sympathize with the Mormons, it was the same with many people who were
in a position of civil servant, people who had a constitutional
obligation to defend every American from threat, foreign or domestic.
The same people who neglected this duty for whatever reason were equally
culpable for the deaths of Mormons just as much as those who pulled the
triggers at Haun’s mill.

10: Religion. This makes the last on our list not because it was most or
least responsible as a contributing factor, but it is, by far, the most
complicated of all and deserves the most careful and scrupulous
examination. By the end of October 1838, even the most ardent Mormon
defenders, e.g. Generals Atchison, Doniphan and Parks, called the
Mormons religious fanatics. The Mormons had been persecuted because of
their religion in many instances, we can’t deny that fact any more than
we can consider it the only reason for persecution, religion was
obviously one of many factors. The Mormons were considered eccentric
zealots by most Missourians. These good-hearted old school farmers and
merchants couldn’t stand to watch so many people deluded by that devil
Jo’ Smith. Many of the people opposed were of the Methodist faith, one
of the largest sub-faiths of Christianity existing in 19<sup>th</sup>
century American culture; they knew for a fact that Joseph was deluding
these thousands of people, effectively leading them to Methodist hell.
It wasn’t just Methodists that were persecuting Mormons, it was really
most other Christians, but most of those other Christians by population
were Methodists, so it’s a useful oversimplification, and it gets at the
heart of deep human instincts. Xenophobia is a powerful human emotion
and when it is the person’s belief in god that presents them as alien,
people with opposed conceptions of god don’t need excuses to persecute
the people who believe in the weird god. Look at nearly any geography
during nearly any time in human history and differing religions were
almost always a factor in violence perpetrated against one group or
class of people. At the same time the Mormons’ religion played its part
in this overall persecution, claiming it was the only reason for the
Haun’s Mill massacre and all the troubles the Mormons were fighting
through is a damaging narrative. It’s a narrative motivated by painting
the most holy and pious portrait of the historical Joseph Smith. This
false and simplistic narrative corrupts the overall perception of Mormon
history and confuses people as to why the Mormons were really
persecuted. Most Mormons are familiar with Haun’s mill, it’s sold as the
height of religious persecution in all Mormon history second only to the
martyrdom of Joseph 7 years later. But to extract the situation from the
historical realm in which it lives does a great disservice to historians
and Mormons alike. It restricts our already limited view of historical
reality. It paints Joseph and the Mormons as righteous martyrs, innocent
of any real crime, when the actual history is so much more nuanced and
complicated.

Let’s zoom out a little bit. At the same time Jennings’ troops were
assaulting Haun’s mill on October 30<sup>th</sup>, 1838, General Clark
was soon to arrive on the outskirts of Far West with the largest militia
ever before gathered by the state of Missouri. 1,000 Missouri
militia-men were beginning to surround Diahmen, and 2,500 soldiers would
soon reinforce the already 1,500 surrounding Far West for a total of
nearly 5,000 armed men surrounding the two Mormon sanctuary cities. The
fighting force of the Mormons was made up of 300 soldiers in Diahmen and
700 in Far West. Granted, they had their fortifications and they had all
entrances and exits to these towns locked down, but how long can 1,000
stand against a siege by 5,000?

I’ve come to view Haun’s Mill as the Mormon Hiroshima. During the
closing months of WWII, America dropped Fat Man and Little Boy on
Nagasaki and Hiroshima Japan, killing tens of thousands and creating
nuclear fallout for millions of Japanese people for generations to come.
However, the argument can be made that if not for those atomic bombs
being dropped, Japan’s defeat would have been much slower and bloody,
possibly with hundreds of thousands of casualties and millions dying
from starvation during a drawn-out conflict. The bombs got the necessary
loss of human life done and over with in a couple of weeks’ time and
threw over the game-board in the mix.

If we look at this through a lens of consequential utilitarianism,
whatever outcome causes the least suffering for the fewest people is the
best possible outcome. As soon as a messenger reached Joseph in the
night following the massacre, serious surrender negotiations began, even
though Joseph, Lyman Wight, and Sidney Rigdon had all been rallying
their troops, claiming they would win or die, never to surrender. How
long could the Mormons last a drawn-out siege with such a massive
disparity of numbers? Could every armed Mormon kill 5 armed Missourians?

Haun’s mill showed the Mormon leadership that the Missourians were
serious. The real threat hadn’t been realized until these 18 people were
wholesale slaughtered. Had this massacre not happened, Joseph may have
declared open war on the Missourians, resulting in a week-long siege of
Far West and Diahmen until they broke. What would that break look like?
How many Mormon militia-men would die in all-out war against a force 5
times their size? How many women and children would have been lost in
the aggregate? How many orphaned or widowed?

There’s simply no answer to any of these questions or hypotheticals.
But, given our perspective of consequential utilitarianism, as much as
the atomic bombs going off was an overall good to minimize human
suffering, the Haun’s Mill massacre was an overall good for the 1838
Mormon war in Missouri. This loss of 18 lives may have spared the lives
of thousands. It’s odd that I find myself calling the Haun’s Mill
massacre an overall good thing after we heard how barbaric and heinous
the Missourians were to the Mormons, and I don’t want to minimize their
very real suffering. Haun’s mill was an abomination in American history,
the revolting actions taken by these hateful men should never be
forgotten. But, we can’t neglect the good that came out of it. Thousands
of Mormons were spared, the prophet wasn’t killed they may have lost
their towns and possessions, but they didn’t lose their lives. The
Mormons would rebound from this situation and eventually move to
Commerce, Illinois, which later was changed to Nauvoo. You can keep
kicking em down, but somehow, amidst all the persecution and unfair
treatment, the resilient Mormons simply refuse to stay down.

Don’t forget to mention Brodies\!

James McBride 1876 microform  
<http://hdl.huntington.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16003coll15/id/11608>

“I was born on the 9<sup>th</sup>, day of May A.D. 1818 in the county of
Fairfield, State of Ohio. I was but two years old when by father moved
to Wayne County. Of that early part of my life you have already read
something in the first chapter of this work. And perhaps I could not say
much more than I have already said that would be of interest to you
about it.

While my father lived on the Red Haw, a branch of the Wohegan—on the
Lease—of which I have already given an account—Came first to us the
sound of the Everlasting Gospel, as revealed to man in these last days.
It was the Gospel of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;
proclaimed by two elders, Thomas Tripp and Harvey Cross. I was then
about thirteen years old. My father, who previously had not felt to join
any Christian denomination, now opened his house, and welcomed the
elders to his home.

(1831) The first Sermons preached on the Red Haw, by elders of this
church, were preached in my father’s house in April 1831, by the above
named elders. Soon after, my father, Mother and Sister Isabelle were
baptized and confirmed members of the church, by the same elders.

(August 1833) My father sold the Lease; and in August 1833, accompanied
by brother Amos and his family, and James McMillen and family, started
to Jackson County Missouri to join with the Church. The Season being
well advanced, he was not able to get further than to Richland County
Ohio that season…

(June 1834) Having traveled about two months with ox teams, in the
latter part of June 1834 we arrived in Pike County Mo.

The church being very much scattered and unsettled, we remained in Pike
County about two years.

(1836) In the spring of 1836, the company above mentioned, moved to Ray
County, and there joined with a branch of the Church. We stopped there
about three months, during which time we suffered a great deal with ague
and fever.

The howling of the mob were heard of every side, and it was decided that
we should move to Caldwell Co.

In September, my father, taking with him what of his children yet
remained at home, and accompanied by James Dayley and wife, moved to
Caldwell County, and settled about three fourths of a mile from Haun’s
Mill on Shoal creek.

There, my father Entered from Government, eighty acres of Land and began
to make a home.

A branch of the church was organized at Haun’s mill, presided over by
David Evans.

(1838) I was baptized into the church of Jesus Christ of Latterday
Saints by David Evans, in June 1838. At the same time James Haun and
Isaac Laney were baptized.

Though many of the followers of the prophet Joseph Smith had been
beaten, tarred and feathered, driven from their homes and their property
confiscated for the use of mobocrats, their persecutions were not yet to
cease. Threats were made against the Mormons, the rights of Citizenship
were denied them.

The little few now fully realizing the dangerous situation in which they
were placed, decided to adopt measures to defend themselves against the
raids of the mob. It was decided that a guard should be kept at the
mill…

(October 30, 1838) One beautiful after-noon on the 30<sup>th</sup> day
of October 1838, my father came home from meeting with the brethren at
the mill. He talked with me, and told me the arrangements made. He was
called to help to form the guard. I was sick at the time, with the
every-other-day ague, and father said on my well day, I should take his
place with the guard and that he would guard on the day that I was sick.
That with himself and me, he wished to fill one man’s place. You will
remember my father was then in his sixty-third year. During the summer
he had been very sick—but having recovered, appeared to feel very well;
in fact I think he looked better than I had ever before saw him.

My sister Catherine was living at the mill with Hauns’ family. Leaving
only me and my youngest sister Dorcas, at home with father and mother.

Father was in good spirits, and his countenance wore a cheerful
expression. Having shaved himself in his usual style, leaving side
boards—and taking with him his gun and blankets, started on his return
to the mill to join the rest of the guard. Mother, with sister Dorcas
started to visit a neighbor woman, living about a quarter of a mile
distant from father’s place. This being the day on which I was sick, the
next day I should have taken father’s place with the guard. I was then
in my twenty first year.

The day was gradually passing—evening was coming on.

The large red Sun so characteristic of an Indian summer, shone through
the smokey atmosphere. All was still.

My father had but little more than got to the mill—in fact not more than
thirty minutes had elapsed from the time he left the house, when a gun
was heard\!—and another\!—followed by the deadly crack of musketry,
which told too well the fate of all who fell a prey to the
b\[l\]ood-thirsty mob\!

Perhaps not more than six minutes had passed from the firing of the
first gun, ‘till the massacre was accomplished,--the bloody deed was
done.

The firing ceased—The Screams of Mothers, daughters and the wounded,
told the dreadful tale\!

That b\[l\]oody picture in the book of time; May it ever stamp with
stigma the brow of that Government that offered not a protecting hand to
those who were ruthlessly cut down—wounded; or made widows, and orphans,
at the Haun’s Mill Massacre.

The Sun slowly sank be-neath the Western Horizon:--and darkness spread
its broad mantle over the universe.

With a single exception, the dead were left lying where they fell—In
fact there were none left that were able to take care of them. Whether
dead or alive, all fared alike—all was uncertainty—all was pain and
sorrow.

In vain did the affectionate wife with aching heart and streaming eyes
watch through the long, long night for the return of her husband.

(October 31, 1838) The 31<sup>st</sup> day dawned, and again the rays of
the morning sun, kissed the land-scape. As yet the extent of the
massacre was not known.

Brother Amos having been detailed on the previous day to get wood for
families, was on his way to the mill when he was told there had been
serious trouble there. His home was about three miles from the mill, and
as he was not detailed on guard, was not at the mill at the time of the
slaughter.

He went on; and passing the mill a short distance, came to Haun’s house.
The first object that met his eye in human form, was the mangled body of
my murdered father, lying in the door yard.

He had been shot with his own gun, after having given it into the mobs
possession. Was cut down and badly disfigured with a corn cutter, and
left lying in the creek.

Some of the women had dragged him from the creek into the door yard and
left him there. One of his ears was almost cut from his head—deep gashes
were cut in his shoulders; and some of his fingers cut till they would
almost drop from his hand.

On further examination it was found that fifteen were murdered, and
fifteen wounded—one of whom was a woman, Mary Stedwell, who in trying to
escape, was shot through the hand, and fell behind a log. Several bullet
holes were found in the log, directly opposite of where she lay.

Alma Smith a small boy; and I believe one \_\_\_\_\_Marrick were the
only wounded children that were yet alive.

Of the wounded men, three afterward died. Making eighteen dead in all.

Isaac Laney a young man that was baptized into the church at the same
time that I was, was in the black-smith shop, when the mob began to fire
on them. His gun stock was shot to pieces in his hands. He then escaped
from the shop, ran to the mill, and climbed down one of the mill timbers
into the creek. That being the quickest way for him to escape, danger.
From there he went into the house, where Sister Catherine, Mrs. Haun,
Mrs. Merril and some other women were. They administered to Isaac, and
put him under the floor. He had received eleven bullet marks in his
body. I was well acquainted with Isaac Laney, and helped to take care of
him until he recovered. He told me that when trying to escape from the
mob, the blood gushing from his mouth would almost strangle him. While
he was under the floor he said he suffered a great deal for want of
water. The women not daring to venture out to get water until they felt
sure the mob was entirely gone.

Isaac recovered, and lived thirty-five years from the day of the Haun’s
Mill Massacre.”

Willard Smith: Alexander L. Baugh: A Rare Account of the Haun’s Mill
Massacre 167  
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/11-MHS_2007_Willard-GIlbert-Smith-Hauns-Mill-Massacre.pdf>

“With my two younger brothers, I was at the blacksmith shop with Father
when without warning a large body of mounted men with faces blackened or
painted like Indians rode up yelling and commenced shooting into the
group. The men at the shop called for “quarters” but the mob paid no
attention, continuing to shoot. The men then shouted to their wives to
take the children and run for their lives.

We were surrounded on three sides by the mob, and the old mill and the
millpond were on the other. The men ran for the shop, taking the little
boys with them. My two little brothers ran with Father. But when I tried
to enter the shop, my arms flew up and braced themselves against each
side of the door, preventing my entrance. In my frenzy of fear, I again
tried to enter the shop, and again my arms were braced to prevent my
going in. After a third futile attempt, I ran around the corner of the
shop and crawled into a pile of lumber, hiding as best I could.

Immediately, the mob began shooting at me and the splintered lumber flew
all around. I crawled out and ran into an empty house on the slope near
the pond. Here I found an old Revolutionary Soldier, Father McBride,3
who had been wounded and had crawled into a potato cellar under the
floor of the house. Although I warned \[him\] that the mob would find
and kill him, he begged for a drink of water and to be helped out of the
cellar. I them went to the millpond to get him some water and was
deliberately fired upon, the bullets spattering in the water like hail.
I escaped without a scratch. (The mob did find this aged Veteran, and as
he raised his hands in supplication for mercy, they were hacked and the
fingers split down by a dull corn cutter.)

I made the old gentleman as comfortable as possible and as the bullets
were flying thickly around us, I ran from this house into another one
close by. Here I heard sobs and whispered comfortings, and lifting the
valance around the bed, I found six little girls huddled in fear. As the
bullets had followed me into this house, I said to the little girls:
“Come we must get out of here or we will all be killed.” So we ran to
the millrace which we crossed on a board reaching the woods on the other
side of the pond—with the mob shooting at us all the way.

After our race for life, the little girls scurried off like prairie
chickens into the brush and tall corn. Knowing that my father and two
brothers were in the shop with the mob still firing, I took shelter
behind a large tree where I could watch the activities of the mob with
comparative safety. Finally, they ceased firing, dismounted, and went
into the shop where they finished killing any whom they thought were not
dead. From there, they went into all the cabins and tents destroying or
taking groceries and furnishings. Then after taking all the horses
belonging to their victims, they rode off howling like Indians.

As soon as I was sure they had gone, I started for the shop and was the
first person to enter this holocaust, stepping over the dead body of my
Father in doing so. I looked around and found by brother Sardis dead
with the entire top of his head shot away, and my brother Alma almost
lifeless lying among a pile of dead where he had been thrown by the
mobsters who, evidently, thought him dead. I picked up Alma from the
dirt and was carrying him from the shop when I met my Mother who
screamed: “They have killed my little Alma.” I replied: “No mother, but
Father and Sardis are dead.” I begged her not to enter the shop but to
help me with Alma.

Our tent had been looted, even the ticking cut and straw strewn about.
Mother leveled the straw and covered it with some clothing and on this
awful bed we placed Alma, cutting off his pants to determine the extent
of his injury. After placing Alma on this improvised bed, my mother,
Amanda Barnes Smith, a woman of dauntless courage and implicit faith in
her Heavenly Father, found that the entire ball and socket of the left
hip had been shot away leaving the bones about three or four inches
apart. As soon as Alma was conscious, Mother asked him if he thought the
Lord could make him another new hip, and he replied that if she thought
he could, then he, too, believed it could be done. Then she called her
remaining three children around the bed, and they knelt and supplicated
the Lord for faith and guidance. Mother dedicated Alma to the Lord,
praying that he be restored and made well and strong, but if this were
not possible, to take him in his innocence. This picture of my Mother’s
implicit faith in her Heavenly Father remained as a living testimony to
her children through their lives.

In her terrible sorrow and bereavement, her only help could come from
divine guidance. By inspiration, her prayers were answered and she knew
what to do. First she was directed to take the ashes from a fireplace
and made a mild lye solution with which she bathed the gaping wound
until it was as white as the breast of a chicken, with all the mangled
flesh and bone gone. Then she prayed for further guidance and was
prompted to take the roots from the slippery elm tree and made poultices
for application. She asked me if I had seen any elm trees, and I replied
that there were some on the banks of the stream feeding the millpond.

By this time, dark had descended upon this tragic scene, and when my
Mother asked if I could take a shovel and get some of the roots, you can
appreciate the terror which gripped my heart as an eleven-year old
child. However, Mother assured me that the Lord would protect me and
with a lighted torch of Shag-bark Hickory, I began by search.

Women and children were lamenting loss of husbands, fathers, and
children; dogs were howling, and the cattle smelling fresh blood were
bellowing, and no one could know how many mobocrats lurked in the
menacing shadows. It required all the courage I could summon to take the
shovel, and with the aid of a dim torch, follow the stream and secure
the roots from which Mother made a soothing poultice. The story of the
miraculous healing of Alma’s hip has been related many times, but few
realize the constant terror of the stricken family, unable to leave the
State as Alma could not be moved because of his injured hip; yet they
were repeatedly warned that if they did not leave, they would be killed.

They were forbidden to call the family together for prayers or even to
pray vocally alone. This Godless silence, Mother said, she could not
stand, so one day, she went down into a corn field and crawled into a
shock of the corn which had been cut. After carefully ascertaining that
no one was within hearing distance, she said she “Prayed till her soul
felt satisfied.” As she left the shock of corn, although there was no
one in sight, she plainly heard a voice repeating these words:

“That soul who on Jesu s hath leaned for repose I cannot—I I will not
desert to it foes. That soul, ’though all hell should endeavor to shake,
I’ll never, no never, no never forsake.”

From that moment Mother said she had no further fear of the mob, and she
inspired us children with faith that if we conscientiously did right,
the Lord would shelter us from harm. Although Alma lay in the same
position for five weeks while the wound was healing, strength seemed to
come to the limb suddenly. One day, when Mother was carrying a bucket of
water from the spring, she was alarmed to hear the children screaming in
the house. She rushed through the door to see them all running about the
room with Alma in lead, crying “I’m well, Ma, I’m well\!” Something had
grown in to take the place of the missing ball and socket, and he was
able to use the limb with no inconvenience. Although it was necessary in
later years to pad the side of his trousers, he never suffered any pain
or discomfort, although he filled a mission in the Sandwich Islands
where he did a great deal of walking.

As soon as Alma was well enough that we could plan to leave Missouri,
great difficulties presented themselves, one being that our horses had
been confiscated by the mob. Finally, I went with Mother to Captain
Comstock, leader of the mob, and she demanded the horses, one of which
was in the field. He said we might have the animal by paying $5.00 for
its feed bill. This Mother could not do as all her money had been stolen
by the mob. I admired her courage when she walked out into the field and
tying her apron around the horse’s neck, led it home with no further
objections”

Lyman Omer Littlefield Autobiography  
<http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html>

“The arrival of Joseph Smith and his first counselor, Sidney Rigdon, at
Far West was a cause of great rejoicing among the Saints. They had fled
from the intrigues of a dangerous conspiracy in Kirtland, originating in
the bosoms of those very men who had been blessed with the enlightening
influences of the spirit of God, which flowed to them through the
channel of the gospel which the angel from the courts of glory had
revealed to the very man whom they persecuted; that man who had given
them his confidence, placed them in positions of prominence and trusted
them as true servants of God's kingdom, and personal friends. Truly, "a
Prophet is not without honor save in his own country and with those of
his own household."

Joseph had escaped from the machinations of his own brethren, it is
true, and the snare they set for his feet, but he was destined not to
find much peace in Missouri. A few months, at most, were all the time
allotted him for a partial rest from the turbulence and sufferings to be
inflicted by a powerful foe. But then--as was ever the case with
him--the whole energies of his soul were absorbed in the glorious
latter-day work to which he had been called by his Divine Master. Of
this great man the humble writer of this little volume had been an
admirer ever since the time he first looked upon and watched his career
in Zion's Camp. And here, in Far West, his admiration and respect for
him personally, as well as for his calling, was heightened day by day.
We watched his intercourse with the people, and listened to his
preaching from the stand, with sentiments of profound respect and
pleasure. There was something in his manner, his countenance and spirit
that was not associated with mortal man that we had ever looked upon
before.

Sidney Rigdon was a fine-looking man, polished in address and powerful
in oratory; but he was far behind Joseph in the possession of those
magnetic powers of the mind which attracted the multitude, and chained
the attention of his auditors. In comparison, Rigdon's eloquence was
delightful, like the ripple of the merry brooklet that glides over its
pebbled bed or dashes down a narrow declivity; but the testimony of
Joseph struck through the heart, and, like the thunder of the cataract,
declared at once the dignity and matchless supremacy of the Creator.

There were various causes which produced dissatisfaction with the people
of the adjacent counties against us. In Caldwell and Daviess Counties we
were strongest at the polls and enabled to elect the men of our choice,
as is the right of American citizens everywhere. We elected to the
Legislature, John Corrill, a member of our Church. At the polls at
Gallatin our opponents tried to prevent our men from voting, by mob
force, but our brethren stood for their rights like men, and cast their
ballots. This took place at the August election of 1838.

On the 4th of July, 1838, the cornerstone for a temple was laid on the
public square at Far West. A liberty pole was erected and the stars and
stripes unfurled to the breeze. An address was delivered on that
occasion by Sidney Rigdon, to which our enemies took great exceptions,
and from which much excitement resulted in Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll
Counties.”

Mrs. Lucy Walker (Smith) Kimball:  
http://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/LLittlefield.html

“Father was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ in 1832; mother,
two years later. They left Vermont in 1834 for the west. They found a
small branch of the Church in Ogdensburg, New York; some of Brother
Kimball's first converts, preparing also to go west. My father was
induced to remain with this branch until 1837. During the year 1835, the
children who were eight years and upwards were baptized by Elder Abraham
Palmer. They were full of faith, having been taught to pray by their
parents, and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and the
signs followed them. Some spake in tongues, others prophesied; again
others had the gift of faith to heal the sick, etc. One of this little
band prophesied that before we reached our destination we would be
surrounded by armed mobs with blackened faces, and would need much faith
in God to endure the many persecutions and trials before us, and that
some of our number would lay down their lives; others would see their
brethren shot down before their very eyes. This was verified at the
wholesale slaughter at Haun's Mill.

Notwithstanding all this we did not falter in our faith, but started on
our perilous journey trusting in God. We passed through Kirtland just
after the Saints had left for the far west. When we arrived in Caldwell
County we were surrounded by a mob of about forty persons with blackened
faces. They hooted and yelled and looked more like demons than human
beings. It was early one December morning when this occurred. They
ordered my poor, delicate mother out into the deep snow, searched our
wagons, took from us our arms and ammunition, pointed their guns at us
children to intimidate us, and cursed and swore in a most frightful
manner. One of the neighboring women had intruded her hateful presence
into our camp, urging them to shoot. "Shoot them down," she cried, "they
should not be allowed to live\!" The question may be asked, how did we
feel under these circumstances? I can speak for one, I did not
tremble--I did not fear them. They looked to me too insignificant and I
felt to trust in One, (although but a child) who held our destinies in
His own hands.

We continued our journey until we came to a settlement on Shoal Creek,
five miles distant from Haun's Mill; my father and another of the
brethren went to the mill to hold council with Brother Joseph Young and
others, as to what course was best to pursue under the circumstances.
They were in a blacksmith shop when a mob appeared in sight, formed in
line and commenced firing, without giving any warning whatever, upon
men, women and children. The first ball fired by the enemy lodged in my
father's right arm. He returned the shot but found it impossible to
reload. He then ran down the bank of the creek, and just before him one
of the brethren in ascending the opposite bank, was shot down. He
stepped under some lumber leaning against the bank, which afforded very
little if any protection, but, in answer to prayer, their eyes were
blinded, and, although they looked directly at him, yet apparently did
not see him, passed on, declaring with an oath that not another Mormon
was to be seen. He remained there until all was silent, then ventured
forth to witness the dreadful scene of the massacre.

In the shop lay the lifeless body of the son of Warren Smith with his
brains beaten out with the breech of a gun, and another of the same
family with his thigh torn entirely away, and apparently mortally
wounded. A little further on an aged man, Father McBride, lay weltering
in his gore. It was not enough to shoot him down, but the murderers had
found an old scythe with which they had mangled that venerable head in a
most horrible and sickening manner. A young woman was also found behind
a huge log, where she had fallen in a fainting condition with a wound in
one of her hands, several bullet holes through her clothing and a volley
had lodged in the log. If a man had on a good coat or a pair of good
boots they were stripped from their bodies in a most brutal and inhuman
manner, while the victims were in the agonies of death.

My father aided in dressing the wounds of those worse off than himself
and to bury the dead as best he could with his left hand. His own arm
was not cared for or scarcely thought of, in the midst of the terrible
suffering of others, until it was in danger of mortifying. Besides, the
country was in such a state of excitement, he had to hide from place to
place, and came near losing his arm. Two weeks later he rejoined his
family, pale and emaciated. My brother William had gone in search,
having learned that his life had been spared, but was wounded. These two
weeks were full of the keenest anxiety.

On the night of this fearful slaughter, a young man came running through
the woods and deep snow, bare headed, telling us that an armed mob had
surrounded those at the mill, and were murdering men, women and
children, and would soon be upon us. This news caused a regular stampede
in our little company, as some of our company had gone to the mill. Some
of the women took their little ones in their arms, while others clung to
their clothes; a loaf of bread and a blanket or two, were carried by
older members of the family, and all rushed deeper into the snow and
adjacent timber. Mother pleaded in vain for all to remain in camp, as
there would be no possible safety in such a flight. The cries of the
famishing children would betray them, besides they could have no fire,
as this too would attract the attention of the mob.

My mother and Sister Davis (whose husband had died enroute, and whose
loss was deeply mourned by all), remained in camp, called their children
together, prayed with them, soothed their fears, and assured them that
the same God whose watchcare had been over us during our journey thus
far, was our friend still and would protect us. We went to bed feeling
that we were safe, and God was our friend; but when the morning dawned
and I looked into my mother's pale face, I was positive she had not
closed her eyes, and felt, child as I was, almost guilty that I had
suffered myself to be lulled to sleep by her magic words of comfort,
while she had kept a vigilant watch during that fearful night of keenest
anxiety. Those who left camp returned exhausted and almost famished.

Early next morning a fine looking young officer rode into camp, and said
he had come as a friend to save us from the fate of those at the mill.
He referred to the dreadful scene with words of sympathy and regret. He
said he was forced to join the military to save his own life, but had
done and would do all in his power to save the oppressed. If we would
follow him, he would lead us to a place of safety, to a friendly
neighborhood, where we would find shelter from the cold storms of
winter. We followed him, and here was where my father found us. James
Flanagan, the young missionary who died with smallpox in England in
1848, was one of our company. He was an exemplary young man; in fact, an
exception among men. His zeal for the cause of truth was unexcelled.

We left the state of Missouri in 1838 and went with the Saints to
Quincy, Illinois, and to Nauvoo in 1841.”

Amanda Barnes Smith  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/1781809>

“When I was in my eighteenth year I was married to Warren Smith, brother
to David, who married my sister Fanna, unto whom I bore five children:
Willard Gilbert born May 9, 1827; Sardis Washington born Sept. 26, 1828;
Alma Lamoni, born Dec. 16, 1831; Alvira Lavoni, born Dec. 16, 1831;
Ortencia Howard, born May 27, 1837. When I married my husband he had
plenty of this world's good, I knew no want, we lived comfortably
together nothing particular transpired until Sidney Rigdon and Orson
Hyde came along preaching Cambellism. I was converted to that doctrine
and baptised by Sidney Rigdon, my hus­band did not much like that, tho
it was by his permission, by this time I had two children and the Doctor
in consequence of my suffering advised me to have no more, but thanks be
to my Heavenly Father, the gospel came along and I was baptised by
Simeon D. Carter the first day of April eighteen hundred and thirty one.
It was by the mercy and power of God that I was brought to a knowledge
of the truth and before a year I gave birth to a pair of twins without a
pain, thanks to my Father in Heaven, that made an awful stir. My mother
would not stay in the house because she found out that I had the elders
pray for me when I was sick or when they were born. My neighbors thought
I ought to be drummed out of town, my husband had been baptised before
that time so we were united and they could do nothing.

My husband's father, Chileab Smith and brothers, David and Syl­vester,
were both baptised, as also Betsy, Sylvester's wife. When David was
baptised Fanny, my sister, howled and screamed so that she was heard a
half mile, she said she never would eat nor drink until he left the
Mormons, she was as good as her word, she went eight or nine days until
she was just about gone and would not put nor let a drop of anything go
into her mouth. When her husband saw that she would die he sent and had
his name taken off from the church record; his father soon followed, so
by one woman, two men fell.Sylvester was a smart and good man. He was
chosen one of the first high council in Kirtland, was one of Zions Camp
and attached to good things - he attained to great height, and
knowledge, then fell away and was lost.

Warren maintained his integrity till the last. He sold out his property
in Amherst and went to Kirtland and bought down west of the temple on
the Shagrin river. He enjoyed himself well, done all he could to
establish the bank and build the temple. Through the downfall of that
place in consequence of our enemies he lost his property, except only a
bare outfit with which he started with his family for the land of
Missouri, in the spring of eighteen thirty eight when he bid farewell to
the land of our fathers and birth and took up our line of march for the
land of the saints . We visited our friends in Amherst but the treatment
we received will never be forgotten by me. My mother said she hoped she
should never see me, hear of me nor hear my name mentioned in the world
again, but we bid them good-by and left them.

I will here record on affadavit that I made out and made oath to in the
city of Quincy, state of Illinois, (visit to Governor) Quincy, Illinois
April 18th, 1839 To whom This May Come:

…my husband, Warren Smith, in company with several other families were
moving from the State of Ohio to Missouri when we were traveling,
minding our own business, we were stopped by a mob of armed men, they
told us if we went another step they would kill us all, they took our
guns from us, as we were going into a new country we took guns with us.
They took us back five miles, placed a guard around us, kept us there
three days and let us go. We traveled on ten miles, came to a small town
composed of one grist saw mill, eight or ten houses all belonging to the
saints, our brothers, there we stopped for the night. A little before
sunset a mob of three hundred armed men came upon us , our men called
for the women and children to run for the woods while they ran into an
old blacksmith shop, for they feared if we all ran together they would
rush upon us and kill men, women and children. The mob fired upon us
before we had time to start from our camp, our men took off their hats
and swung them and cried quarters until they were shot down, the mob
paid no attention to their cries nor their entreaties but fired
alternately.

I took my little girls, my boys I could not find, and ran for the woods,
the mob encircled us in on all sides excepting the bank of the creek so
I ran down the bank and crossed the mill pond on a plank, ran up the
hill on the other side into the bushes. The bullets whistled by me like
hail stones and cut down the bushes on all sides of me. One girl was
wounded by my side and she fell over a log and her clothes happened to
hang over the log in site of the mob and the mob fired at them,
supposing them to be her body; (after all was still, our people cut out
of that log twenty bullets.)

I saw down to witness the awful scene; when they had done firing they
began to howl and one would have thought all the infernos had come up
from the lower regions. They plundered the principle part of our goods,
they took our horses and wagons and ran off howling like demons. After
they had gone I came down to witness and behold the awful scene and Oh,
Oh, horrible, what a sight\!

My husband and one son ten years old lay lifeless upon the ground and
one son six years old wounded very bad, his hip all shot off and to
pieces, the ground all covered with the dead and dying. There were three
little boys crept under the blacksmith's bellows, one of them re­ceived
three wounds, he lived three weeks and died, he was not mine, the other
two were and one of them had his brains all shot out and the other his
hip shot to pieces. Realize, my readers, for a moment the scene. Nothing
but horror and distress; it was sunset, the dogs were filled with rage,
howling over their dead masters, the cattle caught the scent of innocent
blood and bellowed, a dozen helpless widows, thirty or forty orphaned or
fatherless children screaming and grieving for the loss of their
husbands and fathers, the groans of the dying and wounded, all of this
put together was enough to melt the heart of anything but a Missouri
mob. There was fifteen dead and ten wounded, two died next day, there
were no men, or not enough, to bury the dead so they were thrown into an
old well that was dry and covered them with straw and dirt. The next day
the mob came back and told us we must leave the state or they would kill
us all. It was cold weather, they had our teams and our clothes, our men
all dead or wounded, I told them they might kill me and my children in
welcome. They sent word from time to time that if we did not leave the
state they would come and make a breakfast of us. We had little prayer
meetings, they said if we did not stop them they would kill every man,
woman and child. We had spelling schools for our little children, they
said if we did not stop they would kill us all. We done our own milling,
got our own wood, no man to help us.

I started the first of February for the State of Illinois without money,
mobbed all the way, I drown my own team, slept out of doors. I had four
small children, we suffered much with hunger, cold and fatigue, for
what? For our religion, where in a bossed land of liberty deny your
faith or die, was the cry. I will mention some of the leading men of
this mob: two brothers by the name of Crumstock, William Man, Benjamin
Ashby, Robert White and one by the name of Rogers, who took an old
scythe and cut an old White headed revolutioner all to pieces.

Back to autobiography:

I would further state that my husband was stript of his clothes before
he was dead, he had a new pair of calf-skin boots taken off his feet by
Bill Man. He made his brags that he pulled a \*\*\*\* Mormon's boots off
his feet before he was done kicking. The mob went and shot the men over
for fear they were not dead. I saw one of the mob afterwards and asked
him what they intended when they came there? He said they intended to
kill everything that breathed. I will leave it to this honorable
government to say why my damages shall be, what they would have their
fathers, mothers wives and children shot for..

I felt the loss of my husband but not as I should if he had apostatized,
he died in the faith and in hopes of a glorious resurrection. As for
myself, I felt an unshaken confidence in God through it all. I had been
personally acquainted with the prophet Joseph for many years, had seen
his walks and knew him to a Prophet of God, that boyed me up under every
trial and privation.

I would further state that Sardis my second son was killed when his
father was - he was ten years old. Alma had his hip shot off, the entire
hip joint and socket gone leaving the point of the bone about three or
four inches apart, besides the bones badly fractured, pieces worked out
for three months. I knew, naturally, he must be a cripple but I knew
that the same God that formed the first bone could form another,
consequently I dedicated him to the Lord, did the best I could for him
myself, had no doctor. I laid him on a soft bed and let him lie five
weeks and never moved him in that time, the Lord formed a new joint, as
good as the old one, and he ran and lept: like an hart and danced like a
top and is not a cripple.

Willard my first born when about twelve years old was thrown from a
horse and taken for dead. Men ran a half mile then carried him a half
mile before there was any appearance of life but by the power of the
priesthood was brought to life. His skull was badly cracked, his brain
injured, he did not know anything for some days but he got well and his
senses as good as ever. When Alma was about two years old he had the
sore eyes, he was blind for about three months , a thick film grew over
both eyes which was taken off by the prayer of faith in an instant so
that there was no weakness and they are perfectly well. Besides numerous
other healings and great manifestations of the Power of God I have
witnessed in my own family for which I thank and praise my Heavenly
Father for it is His mercy, not any worth or worthiness in me, but to
Him be all the glory, honor, both now and forever. Amen. /s/ Amanda
Smith.”

Ellis Eames  
<https://familysearch.org/photos/artifacts/12594448>

“The next important transaction that took place was that a company was
raised on Grand River, but without any legal authority whatever and came
to our neighborhood and took a quantity of guns from our people. When
they came up to my place I immediately went up to them, conversed with
them and asked what was their object in the strange move they were
making. One of them named Molsey told me that they were taking the guns
from the Mormons, wanting to put a stop to the damned fuss. One young
man named Hiram Abbot who was with me, and with whom I was about making
arrangements to put up a store, who had a gun with him was told to give
up his gun, but he refused, knowing they had no authority for such
strange proceedings, when several of the mob while on their horses
immediately cocked their guns and took aim at him, but did not fire.

Three of them then dismounted viz: Hiram Comstock, Trosher, and Whitney
and pursued after him across the mill dam -- he got up to the side of a
hill and Comstock got by the side of the house, Comstock then drew up
his gun and snapped it three times at him, but without effect; his gun
would not make fire. Abbott seeing that, cocked his gun, but Comstock
got behind the hen house and screened himself from danger. Abbott then
made his escape as fast as possible. The mob then rode off. Very soon
after it was reported that they intended to come and burn the mills. On
receiving this intelligence the neighbors assembled together to consult
what was best to be done, and after some deliberations it was agreed
that there should a few remain at the mill to guard it from the attack
of any individuals who might feel disposed to put their threats into
execution, and from that time there were generally some of the men about
the mills in order to protect it, it being their chief and only place
where they could get any flour or meal…

We continued to hear of mobs in different directions, but at the same
time we felt ourselves measurable safe after being given to understand
by the committee from Capt. Mattison's company that they would not
molest us, if we were peaceable, etc.

On the 31st of October things moved on as usual, we were occupied in our
usual occupations and heard of nothing to increase our fears and were in
hopes that soon such proceedings and alarm would cease and we should
again enjoy the blessings of liberty and peace. The day was far spent;
the sun was sinking fast in the western hemisphere, being only about an
hour and a half high. A number of us where at a short distance from the
mill between it and the blacksmith's shop when one observed there was a
mob coming, and immediately we saw a large company of between 200 and
250 within about one hundred yards from us. Thinking their movements
were hostile, we immediately ran into the blacksmith's shop, for safety.
Some of our brethren had camped a little behind the shop; one of them by
the name of Knight, had just taken up his gun and was going down to the
small lake for the purpose of shooting ducks when the mob came upon him.
One of their leaders named Comstock observing him immediately fired upon
him and shot the strap off his shot pouch. He then ran into the shop
whither we had taken shelter, the mob then kept rushing on towards the
shop and shooting at us. David Evans then ran out and called for peace
and solicited them to desist. Knight also went out again and joined him
supplicating for peace, but all to no effect; they continued to fire
upon them and shot Brother Knight in the hand, taking off one finger and
disabling another, he then retreated towards the mill to cross on the
dam, when he was shot in the back, the ball lodging in the pit of his
stomach.

The women seeing our situation and expecting no better treatment took to
flight, taking their little ones along with them and running away from a
scene of murder, which it is impossible to portray. As the mob
approached nearer the shop, (indeed if we had all been armed it would
have been impossible for us to have resisted them) took deliberate aim
through the cracks and the shop being crowded almost every ball that
entered the shop took effect and every moment some one was exclaiming,
"Oh, I am shot," and first one and then another kept sinking down upon
the ground, writhing in agony, while the blood flowed from their wounds
and steamed upon the floor. One young man standing immediately next to
me was shot, seeing no prospect before us but death, the mob manifesting
all malice possible, and would not listen to our cries, and seemed
determined to murder us all, we thought it advisable for us to try to
make our escape by running out of the shop and cross the mill dam. Those
of us who were able ran out and endeavored to make our escape in doing
which as many were shot down while making the attempt and the mob firing
upon us all the time as long as we were within reach. The mob then
rushed into the shop where the wounded and dying were laying and those
in whom the spark of life was not extinct were then shot over again. A
little boy about nine years old who had hid himself under the bellows
being observed and on being threatened to be shot, he earnestly desired
and prayed for them to spare him, plead for his life, but to no purpose,
for a muzzle shot gun was placed to his head and his brains were
literally blown out, another little boy was likewise shot and died soon
after, still another was shot, but has survived. One old gentleman who
was immediately behind, named Thos. McBride, Esq., ran when we fled from
the shop and was pursued, having a gun in his hand. This was demanded by
his pursuer, he immediately turned round and delivered it up. The
monster then took a corn cutter which he had by his side and cut the old
man into pieces.

Some of the women were shot. Mrs. Merril's clothes were cut in two or
three places with bullets and a young woman named Mary Studwell who was
running away, at a distance from any one else was shot through the hand.
Hearing the balls whistling by her she took shelter behind some logs
which screened her from the balls as several lodged in the logs.

After they had finished their bloody work, the mob next commenced to
plunder, and seeing some teams standing by belonging to the movers who
had lately come along, they loaded the wagons with our goods. They
entirely stripped me of all my clothing as well as my wife's and the
clothes belonging to a young man who was boarding at our house, and all
our bed clothes and beds likewise a quantity of merchandise which they
carried away. Nor did this satisfy them, but those who were murdered
were then robbed of their clothes, watches and everything else of value.
The mobbers took their booty to Grand River and there made a
distribution of the spoils amongst themselves.

I went about two miles and hid in the Hazel brush and then returned with
Mr. Blackburn about ten O'clock at night. I went amongst my friends who
had been shot, and those who had been wounded, I assisted all I could
and administered to their necessities, and early in the morning a few of
us got together and interred the dead in a hole which had been dug for a
well, and then we went and hid in the hazel brush, expecting the mob
would probably be coming to massacre the remainder. Some came, but they
did not appear so hostile, but satisfied themselves with carrying off 2
or 3 horses. A few days after the same company came and pretended that
General Clark had sent them to take prisoners and send them to Richmond
jail. They took me prisoner and kept me in close confinement for nine
days and would not let me converse with any one. They then took
possession of my mills and ground up all the wheat and corn and took it
home to their families and after taking about all the spoil they could
and killed nearly all my hogs, they departed and left me at liberty and
drove off the cattle, etc. They went all around the neighborhood and
threatened the lives of all the Mormons and ordered them out of the
state upon pain of extermination…

These acted without any authority and committed all these murders, and
robberies, yet none of them have been brought to punishment. The affair
was left without investigation and the poor afflicted broken-hearted
survivors left without any redress.”
