---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 70 - Illinois Theocracy with Geisner, Shepherd, Marquardt
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-70-illinois-theocracy-geisner-shepherd-marquardt/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-70-illinois-theocracy-with-geisner-shepherd-marquardt
libsyn_embed: 5788271
redirect_from: /2017/09/29/ep-70-illinois-theocracy-with-geisner-shepherd-marquardt/

category: History
date: 2017-09-28 16:00:46 PDT
---

Intro 9/28/17

Ep 70 – Illinois Theocracy with Geisner, Shepherd, Marquardt

On this episode, we record from NAUVOO during the John Whitmer
Historical Association conference. We talk with historians William
Shepherd, Joseph Geisner, and H. Michael Marquardt about the Council of
Fifty and the Hodge murders, the subjects these historians have been
researching most recently. After that, I offer my own musings wrapping
up the conference with a few headlines which have come out in the Mormon
community recently. Thanks to everybody who made the JWHA conference a
resounding success and such a pleasure to attend this year\!

Links:

John Whitmer Historical Association  
<https://www.jwha.info/>

Joe Geisner Year of Polygamy episode  
<http://www.yearofpolygamy.com/tag/joe-geisner/>

BoM Printer’s Manuscript article  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/865689273/LDS-Church-buys-printers-manuscript-of-Book-of-Mormon-for-record-35-million-from-Community-of.html>

Community of Christ  
<http://www.cofchrist.org/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>  
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

This episode is a break from our regular historical timeline, as will be
next week’s episode. The impetus behind taking a brief hiatus from our
chronological timeline is the fact that I’m amidst travelling for the
JWHA and Mythcon and haven’t been able to sit down and put together the
regular episodes. We’ll pick up our timeline and regular format on the
episode that airs Oct 12. With that out of the way, this week’s episode
is something very special that I’m so excited to share with everybody
listening right now. Before we get into the actual meat of today’s
episode, let me tell you a little about it to provide context for what
you’re about to hear. I’ve spent this previous weekend at the John
Whitmer Historical Association conference. John Whitmer association is a
Mormon history journal which conducts an annual conference with
presentations of publications by their authors for peer review and
discussion. This is one of only a small number of highly respected
historical journals worldwide which publishes in this specific field and
the criteria for getting an article in are incredibly stringent, they
actively fight against Mormon apologetics and anti-Mormon articles
equally by design. I’ll speak more on the actual JWHA at the end of the
episode. Basically, I spent last weekend fraternizing and conversing
with incredibly prominent historians in the field. People whose books
and articles I’ve been consuming the past 4 years were suddenly sitting
at the same table as me and I could ask them pointed questions about
their books and articles and even get some of those books signed.
Today’s episode features 3 historians, one of which has been on the
podcast before, but the other 2 are new to the listening audience.
Please permit me to introduce each historian with a brief overview of
some of their most prominent works.

# Joe Geisner: [“Even Fifty Six Years, Should Wind Up the Scene”](http://rationalfaiths.com/even-fifty-six-years-wind-scene/), “A Review of The Joseph Smith Papers: Revelations and Translations, Manuscript Revelation Books, Facsimile Edition By Robin Scott Jensen”, “The Complete Discourses of Brigham Young by Richard S. Van Wagoner”, Episode 115 of Year of Polygamy, “The Council of Fifty”.

### William Shepherd: “The Concept of a "Rejected Gospel" in Mormon History”,  ["'To Set in Order the House of God': The Search for the Elusive 'One Mighty and Strong'"](https://dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V39N03_32.pdf), Lost Apostles, and a plethora of other books and similar publications.

H. Michael Marquardt: The Four Gospels According to Joseph Smith,
Literary Dependence in the Book of Mormon, The Rise of Mormonism (which
I frequently cite on this podcast), he’s posted the contents of his
extensive collection housed at the J. Willard Marriott Library,
University of Utah. It consists of 419 boxes containing over 4,000 items
including correspondence, clippings, diary copies, scholarly articles,
and miscellaneous research on topics in Mormon history and theology, and
he’s the editor, host, and primary contributor to Mormon research
website user.xmission.com.

It is a rare occurrence to get these three incredible Mormon historians
in one room, much less on one podcast episode to discuss their most
current research. Joe Geisner and Mike Marquardt tell us all about the
Council of Fifty, and Bill Shepherd tells us about the Hodge murders of
1845 in Nauvoo with explicit detail. Here’s a fair warning before I play
the audio for you, this was recorded in a motel room in Nauvoo, it
wasn’t exactly from the comfort of Ground Gnomes studios, so there is
some background noise. I did my best to clean it up, but there is still
some coins jingling, sodas being cracked open, a sink and fridge being
opened and closed, a microwave being operated, some random footsteps,
and a few other noises I couldn’t quite scrub out of the audio. My
sincerest apologies for that, I hope you’ll bear with me because the
content is truly incredible and timeless, and these historians have
never been recorded together on a podcast before, so getting this
interview was a once in a lifetime experience. I hope you enjoy
listening as much as I enjoyed conducting the interview. For those
listeners coming over from Cognitive Dissonance to satiate that
cliffhung sensation I teased you with, you’ll learn about the third main
reason why the Mormons were forced out of Illinois at the end of the
episode. Just a hint, it relates to what Bill Shepherd describes in this
interview. Without further ado, here is my interview with Joe Geisner,
Mike Marqardt, and Bill Shepherd.

Insert interview

Thank you for your patience, I hope the audio wasn’t too offensive, but
like I said, the content is timeless and it was such a pleasure to have
these guys on; this was a rare interview to get with these three
incredible historians and once again, I’d like to thank them for taking
the time to sit with me and share their research. For those of you who
came over here from Cognitive Dissonance, you’ve probably been dying to
know exactly what that third thing was which served to be one of the
main driving factors behind the Mormons being removed from Nauvoo, thus
forcing them to settle in Utah. Item one was Politics and the political
movements made by Jo and the Mormons. Item 2 was the severe economic
stress the Mormons were under for myriad reasons which we’ve only begun
to cover in our historical timeline. Finally, the third primary reason
the Mormons were removed from Nauvoo was the entire underground world
existing under the shiny and PR friendly Nauvoo visitors saw. Bill
Shepherd gave us one small insight to the Mormon underground with the
Hodge murders which has been the focus of his research for the past 30
years, but Nauvoo was driven by the Mormon mafia family with Joseph
Smith sitting atop his Mormon empire as kingpin of it all. The Nauvoo
police force wasn’t so much a police force as it was an armed mafia
group making deals the people couldn’t refuse. The river rat robbers,
Driscoll gang, William Brown gang, the Hodges, all were only one small
aspect of mafia violence, but if you crossed Jo, it wasn’t long before
you came down with a spontaneous case of 24-hour cholera or consumption
which had a 100% fatality ratio. Either that, or you were taken out on a
hunting trip and you’d disappear with the Mormons coming back crying
Missouri mob violence. The prevalence of mysterious deaths became a
highly suspicious aspect of day-to-day Nauvoo life. Once the non-Mormons
around Nauvoo began to catch wind of these mysterious deaths of
dissenters, gentiles, or anybody who crossed the leadership, Jo was seen
as an out-of-hand Godfather operating well beyond the constraints of any
set of laws, instilling himself as the one true theocrat of the
One-Mormon world government. It only took his overt public act of
destroying the Nauvoo Expositor printing press for the public to finally
realize just how malignant of a force on society he was and take matters
into their own hands, resulting in a vigilante mob assassinating Joseph
and Hyrum Smith in Carthage Jail in June 1844.

Surprisingly enough, Bloody Brigham Young realized how much of a problem
this was and I’m told he had most of it cleaned up by mid-1846, but with
the debts of the Nauvoo land so far in default and confused with land
speculation by dishonest men, coupled with the massive schism left in
the wake of the prophet’s death with no clear succession plan in place,
Bloody Brigham had no choice but to abandon Nauvoo. It’s worth noting
that once Brigham and the largest bloc of Mormons left, the mob violence
almost completely vanished and the Mormons which decided to remain with
Emma and the teenage Joseph III began building peaceful relationships
with the non-Mormons in the surrounding area.

Needless to say, as our historical timeline matures further into the
Nauvoo years in the coming years of the podcast, there will be a lot to
cover and we’ll be doing a lot more book reports as I continue to
consume more publications relating to this incredibly controversial and
confusing era of Mormon and American history.

To wrap up for today, let’s spend some time talking about the field of
Mormon history in the abstract. I want to share some thoughts which I
can’t escape given this past week and a half. So much has happened and
I’m trying to figure out what’s most important to talk about.

Let’s begin with discussing the recent acquisition of the Printer’s
manuscript of the Book of Mormon by the LDS church, purchased from the
Community of Christ. For those of you unfamiliar with the story or
listening in the backlog, check the show notes for a link to the Deseret
News article about it. Simply put, the printer’s manuscript of the BoM
was one of the last valuable documents the LDS church wanted to acquire
from the Community of Christ, and they’ve wanted it ever since it was
put in the possession of the CoC in the early 1900s. Last week, the LDS
church purchased the Printer’s manuscript for $35mn dollars, a deal
they’ve supposedly been working on for over a year. For some context,
this is the most money ever transferred for a single manuscript of any
kind in all human history. The second most was the 72-page Leonardo da
Vinci Codex Hammer which Bill Gates purchased in 1994 for just under
$31mn. So, if you factor in inflation, the da Vinci manuscript
transaction would be just a hair shy of $50mn in today’s dollars, so in
that respect this BoM printer’s manuscript doesn’t quite take the cake
as the most money transferred for a single manuscript in all history,
but it does at face value.

Let’s dive in just a little further. This story broke on the first day
of the John Whitmer Historical conference, which is run by the CoC.
Could be coincidence, but I doubt it. The $35mn the LDS church put up
for the manuscript is said to be funded by a few wealthy investors who
are donating the manuscript to the church, which is the method by which
most of these rare document acquisitions are done, but the church
fronted the money for it. That means, the church isn’t going to actually
feel the pinch from this massive purchase, and a few people just
undoubtedly had their calling and election made sure.

We may ask why the CoC sold the Printer’s manuscript in the first place.
Well, at the conference, I attended a presentation by my friend, Tom
Kimball, who is kind of known as the sweetheart best friend of everybody
who helps to bridge the gap between the two churches. Tom is the primary
maintenance guy for the Kirtland Temple, which is owned by the CoC, and
in his presentation, he spoke of a few projects the temple desperately
needs to continue operating. The projects he listed probably total about
$20k, but the temple needs a lot more TLC above and beyond those simple
projects to be restored to pristine condition. He ended the presentation
by saying if there are any copiously wealthy people in attendance who
want to help fund projects to keep the Kirtland Temple in good repair,
that they should contact him to set something up. To be clear, the CoC
and the LDS church have cooperated on renovations of the Kirtland Temple
before for major updates needed to keep it standing, but there isn’t any
partnership set in stone above and beyond a couple big projects they’ve
combined forces to accomplish.

The simple fact that Tom talked about the CoC needing donors to keep the
temple site up and running is indicative of a problem the CoC is
suffering from, they seem to only be scraping by and probably are in
desperate need of this $35mn from the LDS church for myriad costly
projects with which they’re engaged. But, the CoC isn’t alone, this
resource vacuum is a larger trend affecting all churches nationwide,
they’re all starting to feel the growth of secularism hitting them in
the pockets. The LDS church has a pretty solid bumper crop to stay alive
with diversified investments in plenty of secular projects, but I’ll bet
they’re going to start taking desperate measures soon to stay
financially solvent. Gordon B. Hinkley’s push to build dozens of new
temples was a good idea in the short term, but as attendance wanes,
those temples will soon become a major liability and the projected
return on investment will begin to look like a pipedream.

I want to add my personal thoughts on this, but before I do, let’s
discuss another story which broke this last week in the Mormon
community. Prominent Mormon historian Grant Palmer just passed away.
He’s been ill for quite some time and this was a sweet release after a
lifetime well fulfilled. On a personal level, his book, An Insider’s
View of Mormon Origins, was an integral piece to my interest in Mormon
history and serves as a great introduction to the field of being a real
historian by comparing differing accounts of the first vision experience
and other aspects of early Mormonism. I’ve conversed with countless
people who have the same high regard for his work. Grant Palmer will be
dearly missed by all who met him or read his books, and I extend my best
wishes and condolences to his family and beloved friends who’re mourning
his passing as we speak. Thank you for you work, Grant.

Reflecting on Palmer’s passing, I’m struck with an overwhelming sense of
worry, and please permit me some anecdotal observances to justify this
worry. Palmer’s passing marks one more cog turn in the endless wheel of
elderly Mormon historians passing as the new generation slides in to
attempt filling the void left behind. One observation which struck me at
this John Whitmer historical conference was the fact that there were
only maybe half-a-dozen people there under the age of 30 out of more
than 200 attendees, and if you factor our statistic-skewing age out of
the aggregate, the average age of conference attendees trended above
half a century. At every major gathering during the conference, the sea
of silver dusting the congregation couldn’t be ignored, and according to
friend of the show, Jason Smith, when he joined in 2001 it was salt and
pepper. Needless to say, the salt of the earth has overtaken the pepper
in the crowd.

The fact of the matter is, the authorities of Mormon history who began
researching and publishing in the 60s, 70s, and 80s are aging, and in
another couple decades, they won’t be able to contribute to the field
any more. But losing their contributions to the field is only the
beginning of what will truly be lost in the coming generation, because
all their knowledge and memories which aren’t recorded will be lost
forever, which is where the true loss comes in to play. On a personal
level, grappling with the implication of the gentrifying field of Mormon
historians is saddening. It’s overwhelming how tragic it is that this
field will lose the majority of prominent Mormon historians within a
generation’s time.

If the next wave of budding historians doesn’t step in and nestle
comfortably under the wings of these intellectual towers of the
community, untold memories and research will be forever lost. For those
of you interested in church history, an opportunity exists here, but the
window is closing relatively quickly.

This was my first JWHA, and the feeling of overwhelming fraternity and
love expressed by these incredible people is more than my constricted
vocabulary can elucidate. Upon my arrival, Joe Geisner plugged me into
to a dinner party with Brent and Erin Metcalf, Mike Marquardt, Joseph
Johnstun, Bill and Dianne Shepherd, Johnny Stephenson, and a number of
other historians, chatting over bbq pork sliders and diet Pepsi. From
that moment throughout the rest of the week, there was never a moment I
wasn’t speaking with Mormon historians who treated me as one of the
family. Acquaintances and relationships were built that I’ll cherish for
the rest of my life and continue to foster ever year in the future as I
plan on attending every JWHConference for decades to come.

The JWHA is one of very few places where Strangites, Brighamites,
Bickertonites, Josephites, and even secular Mormons like myself, can
come together and respectfully discuss Mormon history on a level playing
field in places like historic Nauvoo and Independence, Missouri slated
for next year. And now, I must say something that may offend some of
those listening, but it’s a conflict plaguing my mind with
contradictions, clouded by the love and fraternity which filled the air
around these amazing people. The JWHA is a secular organization. It may
be run by the CoC and staffed with almost exclusively religious people,
but it’s no ministry, it’s an academic organization created to
peer-review and publish Mormon history. The JWHA MUST continue to
survive. I hold no love for any religion. Whether it’s the Community of
Christ, or the Brighamite LDS church in SLC, or even Catholicism or
Islam, they’re all religions and they continue to fall further into the
annals of human history like every religion has with the inverse rise of
Secularism. But these religions aren’t their people. The people may make
up the religion, but it’s easy to love people and not love their
religion. My point is, we MUST venerate these Mormon historians who may
not be with us in 10 or 20 years’ time. It’s up to those of us who love
Mormon history, regardless of beliefs, to build up and perpetuate these
Secular conferences and hear the stories related by these incredible
people who were publishing controversial Mormon history when it meant
the end of their career and status in their community and family to do
so. These people risked everything for the history we read from books
published in the last 60 years. We can’t save the dying religions, but
we can do everything in our power to keep secular education institutions
alive.

If the JWHA declines in membership at the same rate religions are
declining in membership across America, this incredible secular academic
organization may not be around as the generations of current historians
pass away without being replaced by the next generations of budding
historians. After attending my first time, I love the JWHA and the
people whose acquaintance I was privileged to make. I know if those of
you who’re listening right now were to attend one of these conferences,
you’d have a similar experience. Reading books and articles or listening
to podcasts about Mormon history in the comfort of your home is one
thing, but actually talking to another person face-to-face and building
those important personal relationships is a completely different
experience. I can’t describe what chocolate tastes like, it’s better for
you to eat some of it for yourself so you can understand what I’m
trying, and failing, to properly describe.

To wrap everything up, I owe a debt of gratitude to all of the wonderful
organizers of the JWHA conference for doing such a stellar job in making
this year’s conference a resounding success. Specifically, thank you to
Bill and Sherry Morain, Dan Whittemore, next-year’s president Rachel
Killebrew, Cheryle Grinter, Jason Smith, and everybody else on the back
end who put so many hours into this conference. Their endless efforts
were made abundantly apparent with how smoothly everything went and they
deserve every accolade and word of gratitude I could possibly offer.
Also, thank you again to Joe Geisner, Mike Marquardt, and Bill Shepherd
for taking the time to talk to us on the show today. Thank you to Tom
and Shad Kimball, Mike and Matt, whose last name I can’t remember,
Deverey Anderson, Johnny Stephenson, Brent and Erin Metcalf, Vickie
Speek, and everybody else whose company was such a pleasure to enjoy.
And a huge thanks to Joseph Johnstun for giving us a proper Nauvoo tour
and sharing so much Nauvoo knowledge with the group and me.

Thank you to the Patrons who funded this trip over at
patreon.com/nakedmormonism, we’ll catch up on new patrons next week when
I have some time in the office to sit down and catch up on the regular
business of the show.

Thanks to Julie

Andrew

Jason

Craig

Especially exceptional listeners
