---
layout: post
title: Ep 76 - Blasphemers Beware
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-76-blasphemers-beware/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-76-blasphemers-beware
category: History
date: 2017-11-10 02:14:23 +0000
---

Ep 76 -- Blasphemers Beware

On this episode, we take a look at the avalanche of acts and ordinances
that were being passed in Nauvoo to establish some semblance of a real
operating city. Joseph Smith and his favored elites had a lot of work to
do and were in the process of forming new committee and organizations on
a daily basis to answer the myriad needs of the burgeoning community.
Once again, we find speculation to be the sole ruling factor in the
formation of any Nauvoo business or agency. Jo even passed an act
against intolerant speech against people of faith, we can't have those
atheists building a church in Nauvoo now, can we? After that we'll get
into part 2 of my conversation with Jack Naneek of the Mormon Awakenings
podcast, where we really discuss some hard issues with the church's
stance on LGBTQ+ people and the value churches give society. Patreon
subscribers be sure to check your feed. There's an exciting announcement
with Ryan McKnight as a separate episode over there and patrons of the
show get to hear it a week early.

Links:

History of Blasphemy Laws\
<https://ffrf.org/outreach/item/20813-we-swear-blasphemy-laws-still-on-the-books>

Maryland Blasphemy Law\
<http://msa.maryland.gov/megafile/msa/speccol/sc2900/sc2908/000001/000388/html/am388--824.html>

Charles Lee Smith\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Lee_Smith>

Constitutional Convention\
<http://teachingamericanhistory.org/convention/>

Mormon Awakenings Podcast w/Jack Naneek\
<http://www.mormondiscussionpodcast.org/category/episodes/mormonawakenings/>

Holy Crap Vlogcast guest spot\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZsKerih3fg>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>\
Voicemail Line (864)Nake-dMo (625-3366)

For some milk today, let's review where we sit in the timeline.
Basically, we're in the foundational days of Nauvoo. There was so much
work to be done in order to establish it as the Mormon utopia envisioned
by the prophet and his favored elites. John C. Wreck-it Bennett was
elected Mayor of Nauvoo and he's been running the place as a dictator,
giving tasks to Jo which were necessary to carry out for building up the
kingdom on the Mississippi. Little side note, thank you to the unnamed
sender who sent me a copy of Robert Flanders book, it was a very kind
gift and you can see a picture of me with it as soon as I opened it up
on the Naked Mormonism facebook page. Once again, thank you, whoever you
are. Jo and Bennett were creating a bunch of new committees and
organizations which they hoped would make Nauvoo a real town with a
thriving economy. That was the hope, we'll see how it plays out in the
coming years leading up to the removal of the saints from Nauvoo.

Let's devour some meat and see how what new projects Jo picked up
through the rest of February and March of 1841.

By mid-February 1841, where we currently reside in our timeline, Nauvoo
was becoming too populous and cumbersome to deal with as a single
entity. In response to the challenging logistics this posed, Jo and John
Wreck-it Bennett responded by subdividing the city up into separate
wards. Mormons today will recognize that word as being the terminology
used for churches today. In any given area, there is usually a wardhouse
or stake center with the local population divided up into multiple wards
based on geography or income of the neighborhood or a few other factors.
This was the first time the word "ward" was used in early church
history. Prior to this, congregations were referred to as stakes of
Zion, like how you stake a tent. These congregations were seen as groups
which all supported the main contingency of Mormons at Zion HQ, wherever
that was at the given time. Zion was the tent and the other
congregations were stakes. With Nauvoo growing at the rate it was and
requiring so much infrastructure to support the population, it was
divided into 4 separate wards, surveyed and sanctioned by the prophet
himself.

The HoC has the entire ordinance, but I'll spare you reading it because
it's meaningless to us. It is important to note that Jo immediately
passed another ordinance creating new positions inside the Nauvoo
government to help deal with the fracturing of the city into separate
wards:

"Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that in
addition to the city officers heretofore elected, there shall be elected
by the city council, one high constable for each ward; one surveyor and
engineer, one market master, one weigher and sealer, and one collector
for the city, whose duties shall hereafter be defined by ordinance."

Beyond separating Nauvoo out into 4 separate wards, Jo decided to create
a couple of committees and incorporate a business venture or two. The
first he sought to create wasn't just a committee, but an entire
association which Nauvoo desperately needed.

"An Act to incorporate the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing
Association in the County of Hancock.

Sec 2. The sole object and purpose of said association shall be for the
promotion of agriculture and husbandry in all its branches, and for the
manufacture of flour, lumber, and such other useful articles as are
necessary for the ordinary purposes of life.

Sec 3. The capital stock of said association shall be one hundred
thousand dollars, with the privilege of increasing it to the sum of
three hundred thousand dollars, to be divided into shares of fifty
dollars, which shall be considered personal property, and be assignable
in such manner as the said corporation may by its by-laws provide:..

Sec 5. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and William Law shall be
commissioners to receive subscriptions for, and distribute said capital
stock for said corporation;..."

Yes, this was Jo and 20 of his friends creating another business venture
in the form of an Ag and manufacturing association, and they set the
price of stock in the business. The thing is, this wasn't already a
profitable business which could be successfully divided up, it was just
a business they made up on paper and sold stock shares in. This
association may have served some kind of real purpose, but let's not
take the noble sounding title at face value, this was another company
made so the Mormons could speculate in the hopes of making it big. The
first section of the act did list the 20 people who were named the
trustees and paid in stock for serving on the board of the association.
You're supposed to have capital in a company before you trade it around
and speculate on its stock, but all these companies were missing that
crucial part of their investing, real capital.

I'll just add this in to the mix, Governor Thomas Carlin, as well as the
speakers of the state senate and house of representatives signed the act
creating this association. They weren't unaware of what the Mormons were
doing with creating these businesses, but I assume they, like the
Mormons, had some kind of blind optimism in hopes that Nauvoo would pan
out and eventually the capital and manufacturing of the city would match
the need for all these committees and associations. But never forget
this detail, they were all overseen by the same group of Mormon elites,
continually spreading themselves ever thinner.

The next act to pass was "An act to incorporate the Nauvoo House
Association". We've discussed this a bit in the pass, so we won't rehash
it, but needless to say, it was just another company that was created on
paper with tradeable stock without having any real capital to throw
around. Jo and friends hadn't learned from the KSS company and were just
creating another bubble in the Nauvoo economy.

Creating business ventures damned upon their creations wasn't the only
thing Jo was doing, this was one of his most active times in church
history when it came to documentable day-to-day activities. It was
nearly every other day that Jo was bringing an act, report, or ordinance
to the Nauvoo government officials to be passed, and basically anything
Jo brought to them was rubber stamped through because, well.... He's the
prophet and his followers aren't going to oppose legislation and
business ventures he brought to them. Jo took a page out of the American
playbook when it came to territory. The way I had always understood
Nauvoo history was that the Saints initially began settling in Commerce,
Illinois, then once the Nauvoo charter was passed, Commerce just became
Nauvoo. That was inaccurate and the HoC sheds a bit of light on this
subject. Basically, Commerce still existed as an incorporated township,
but Nauvoo was set to absorb any nearby town into its boundaries, which
is what happened with Commerce.

"Your committee, to whom was referred that portion of the address of his
honor, the mayor, which is recommended the propriety of vacating the
Town Plats, Commerce, and the city of Commerce, and incorporating them
with the city plat of Nauvoo, would respectfully report:\--That they
consider the recommendation contained in the address as one of great
importance to the future welfare and prosperity of this city, and if
carried into effect would make the streets regular and uniform, and
materially tend to beautify this city. We would therefore respectfully
recommend that the survey of the city of Nauvoo be carried through the
Town Plats of Commerce and the City of Commerce, as soon as it may be
practicable.\
We would therefore recommend to the council the passage of the following
resolution: That the Town Plats of Commerce, and Commerce City be
vacated, and that the same stand vacated from this time forth, and
forever; and that the same be incorporated with the city of Nauvoo, from
this time henceforth and forever."

With this ordinance passed, Jo effectively dissolved Commerce, Illinois
and annexed the land into the township of Nauvoo. Prior to Nauvoo being
a real town, Commerce was the incorporated city that Nauvoo was placed
on top of, but there wasn't any actual city infrastructure for Nauvoo to
absorb, it was just empty acreage. Jo was a product of his time; there's
a bunch of land without anybody or very few people on it, we'll just
call it part of our bigger civilization and assume control over the
land. We European settlers had made quite a habit of doing this to
American soil.

Jo thought it was a good idea to emulate even more aspects of American
law and policy beyond just annexing large swaths of land. The founding
fathers had trotted out their best arguments for what should and
shouldn't be included in the American constitution 54 years before
Nauvoo was incorporated as a city, and they made good cases for why
certain provisions like free speech and right to assembly should be
enshrined in the constitution. Jo sought to follow their example in more
ways than one.

From the Vogel HoC 4:300

"Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that
in order to guarantee the constitutional right of free discussion upon
all subjects, the citizens of this city may from time to time, peaceably
assemble themselves together for all peaceable, or lawful purposes
whatever; and should any person be guilty of disturbing or interrupting
any such meeting or assemblage, he shall on conviction thereof before
the mayor or municipal court, be considered a disturber of the public
peace, and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, or
imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of said
mayor or court.

Sec. 2. Should any person be guilty of exciting the people to riot, or
rebellion, or of participating in a mob, or any other unlawful riotous
or tumultuous assemblage of the people, or of refusing to obey any civil
officer, executing the ordinances of the city, or the general laws of
the State or United States, or of neglecting or refusing to obey
promptly, any military order for the due execution of said law; or
ordinances, he shall, on conviction thereof as aforesaid, be fined or
imprisoned, or both as aforesaid."

This was a good provision to write into law for a few reasons. The
Mormons were a large congregation of people and they wanted the right to
peaceably assemble without raising the attention of, or offending, any
mob or militia force, especially the occasional Missouri militiaman who
would wander into town trying to serve arrest warrants to the prophet.
Also, the Mormons were people, and people aren't happy with stuff so
they get out of their homes and get together in groups with pitchforks
and they yell about whatever may grieve them. No TV to satiate boredom.

The first American blasphemy law I could find on record came out of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts-Bay in 1697.

"An act against atheism and blasphemy:

Be it declared and enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is
enacted by the Authority of the same; That if any Person shall presume
willfully to blaspheme the holy Name of God; Father, Son, or Holy Ghost;
either by denying, cursing or reproaching the true God; his Creation or
Government of the World; or by denying, cursing, or reproaching the Holy
Word of God; that is, the canonical Scriptures contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testaments; namely (lists books of Bible sans
apocrypha); Every one so offending shall be punished by Imprisonment,
not exceeding six Months, and until they find Sureties for the good
Behaviour; by sitting in the Pillory; by Whipping; boaring thorow the
Tongue, with a red hot Iron; or sitting upon the Gallows with a Rope
about the Neck; at the Discretion of the Court of Assize, and General
Goal Delivery, before which the Trial shall be; according to the
Circumstances, which may aggravate or alleviate the Offence.

Provided that not more than two of the fore-mentioned Punishments shall
be inflicted for one and the same Fact."

This came right on the heels of the Salem Witch Trials and executions
which had happened less than half a decade prior to this law being
passed. Of course, this happened before almost all of the laudable
founding fathers were born and America was actually declared as a
secular nation, so let's look at laws passed after America became the
United States to get a bit more context. A Maryland statute was first
created in 1723, but enshrined as law in 1819 which states:

"If any person, by writing or speaking, shall blaspheme or curse God, or
shall write or utter any profane words of and concerning our Saviour,
Jesus Christ, or of and concerning the Trinity, or any of the persons
thereof, he shall, on conviction, be fined not more than one hundred
dollars, or imprisoned not more than six months, or both fined and
imprisoned as aforesaid, at the discretion of the court."

What's interesting here is that this and most similar blasphemy laws are
fairly limited in scope in that they only protect Christianity, but they
could be interpreted quite broadly. For example, a person could hand out
pamphlets all day that said Allah is a false God and Mohammed a false
prophet, clearly blasphemous speech, and it seems that nobody would
bother you. But, as soon as somebody living in a state with blasphemy
laws said that the bible isn't true, it was off to the courthouse with
them which frequently resulted in fines or jail time.

In the 1800s, it wasn't considered a violation of church and state
separation or free speech to have blasphemy laws and many states still
have completely impotent blasphemy laws on their books. Thanks to a
small handful of rulings, juris prudence has completely neutered these
laws, so they only take up paper and ink and do nothing for anybody, but
that's a luxury of our modern laws. It wouldn't be until the early 1900s
that rulings came out of various supreme courts which nullified
blasphemy laws. In 1928, a man named Charles Lee Smith began handing out
pamphlets promoting atheism and evolution in Arkansas. He was charged
with blasphemy and ended up refusing to swear oath in court on the
bible, so the court refused to let him testify on his own behalf. The
judge in that case withdrew the charge of blasphemy, for which Lee was
originally convicted, then slapped him with a charge of distributing
obscene, slanderous, or scurrilous literature. That charge stuck and Lee
ended up paying the fine and serving jail time for distributing what was
seen as the legal equivalent of porn for free to minors.

Let's not mince words about Charles Lee Smith though, he was a product
of his time, being born in 1887, and was totally on board with eugenics
and the white master race. He held to evolution as an immutable truth
and as a pseudo-logical step thought white's were the superior race, but
he was an early atheist activist. We can appreciate some actions people
have taken to move society forward, even if those people held some
deplorable and ignorant beliefs, and Charles Lee Smith is a great
example of a person we can commend for good actions, but condemn for
holding to certain bigoted beliefs.

The reason it's relevant to discuss some of the history of blasphemy
laws is to shed some light on the legal atmosphere from which the Nauvoo
city laws and ordinances were derived. Jo passed another ordinance, this
one titled "An ordinance in relation to Religious Societies."

"Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that the
Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, Latter-day Saints,
Quakers, Episcopalians, Universalists, unitarians, Mohammedans, and all
other religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have free
toleration, and equal privileges, in this city; and should any person be
guilty of ridiculing and abusing, or otherwise depreciating another, in
consequence of his religion, or of disturbing or interrupting any
religious meeting within the limits of this city, he shall on conviction
thereof before the mayor or municipal court, be considered a disturber
of the public peace, and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred
dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both at the
discretion of said mayor or court."

The second section puts the teeth in saying anybody seen ridiculing a
person based on their religion should be immediately arrested and dealt
with according to this ordinance. You can read through the Book of
Mormon and the occasional atheist will pop up and have an argument with
the prophet. Atheists were surprisingly common back in 19^th^-century
America. I found this article in the Evening Post published in NY, NY
March of 1822 which seems to bring up some interesting points.

"It is said that attempts are making to produce a political effect upon
the community by the agitation of the question touching the decision of
the Supreme Court in regard to the admissibility or exclusion of
witnesses on the ground of their religious faith...This very question
was a subject of consideration in our late Convention and on a motion
made by Gen. Root, "That no witness shall be questioned as to his
religious faith."---

Col. Young said, "If by religious faith were meant a belief in a supreme
being and in future rewards and punishments he should oppose it.---The
testimony of and Atheist and Infidel ought not to be placed upon an
equality with others, as he could feel no responsibility."

The question on the motion of Gen. Root was then taken by ayes and noes,
and decided in the negative, ayes 8, noes 94."

This was a fairly common way atheists were treated in the 19^th^
century. Their testimonies weren't taken as truthful in court and when
they would pass out pamphlets and whatnot saying God isn't real they
were seen as disturbers of the peace and often suffered fines or jail
time for preaching their atheism. This ordinance Jo wrote into Nauvoo
law was a product of its time, all religions enjoyed a protection, but
somebody without a religion could be fined or thrown into prison for
voicing their opinion, should they be deemed a disturber of the peace by
the Nauvoo government, which was comprised of almost entirely the Mormon
elite.

Are we somehow past this? The main reason I find history so interesting
and compelling is it informs us of how we got to where we are. I get so
frustrated hearing arguments that because we had the 14^th^ amendment
and the civil rights movement that we've somehow left it all behind us
and we're enlightened beyond the constraints of our ignorant past. No,
we're still a product of our society and still operate within the
margins of tolerance dictated by the world we leave behind when we wake
up every morning. Society has solved so many issues which used to hold
us back, but it's an upward trend that needs active attention to
continue towards the goal of total equality. There will be blips where
equality dips on our way, but society is a hell of a lot more equal
today than it was in Joseph Smith's day. Back then, they didn't accept
an atheists testimony in court because an atheist doesn't have morals
and you can't trust somebody if they don't swear over the bible. In Jo's
day, women's say in politics was nothing more than them raising good men
who would one day grow up and vote for their own mothers. When Joseph
was alive people owned other people as farm implements as a person owns
a windrower today. That's where America was 5 generations ago, and I'm
optimistic to see how far we've come and hopeful for where we're going,
as long as we don't let society slip backwards in our apathy.

When we last left off with Jack, he and I were discussing whether or not
it's a worthwhile endeavor to seek validation from the church and a
person's community when that church and community don't agree with the
person's lifestyle.

Church gets reinvented every 20 yrs, but what about people who suffering
in the mean time

Church accepts a lot of different kind of people and taking care of
them, only when you do what the church says and aren't gay

Church protects children from big life altering dangers that can happen
during teen years, drugs?

Holy Crap
