---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 102 - Mother’s Day, The Virtues of Our Legacy'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-102-mothers-day-virtues-legacy/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-102-mothers-day-the-virtues-of-our-legacy
category: History
date: 2018-05-11 03:37:22 +0000
---

Ep 102 -- Mother's Day, The Virtues of Our Legacy

On this episode, we take the opportunity of Mother's Day to examine the
life and struggles of some of the most prominent mothers throughout
Mormon history. From Lucy Mack Smith caring for her children in ill
health, to Mother Elizabeth Ann Whitney providing a home for Joseph and
Emma when they first arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, and well beyond to the
women who provided the caretaking, medicine, midwifery, and social
structure to build each of the Mormon kingdoms. The actors may get the
awards, but everybody else actually making the show run on the back end
are often relegated to the footnotes section. Let's bring them to life
again. After that, we have on J.R. Becker with his new children's book
about the skeptical side of death. How do we have these tough
conversations with our children when they inevitably arise? J.R. shares
some of his personal experience and inspiration which led to his writing
the Annabelle & Aiden series.

Links:

D. Michael Quinn Newel K. Whitney Family\
<https://www.lds.org/ensign/1978/12/the-newel-k-whitney-family?lang=eng>

Carol Cornwall Madsen Mormon Women and the Struggle for Definition\
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V14N04_42.pdf>

Elizabeth Ann Whitney\
<http://www.ldswomenofgod.com/2008/07/28/elizabeth-ann-smith-whitney/>

Timeline of Joseph and Emma Smith\
<https://historyofmormonism.com/joseph-smith/timeline-joseph-smiths-life/>

Annabelle & Aiden\
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1269876999/annabelle-and-aiden-what-happens-when-we-die?ref=discovery&term=annabelle%20and%20aiden>\
<https://annabelleandaiden.com/press/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Preshow segment

Lucid or trippy music.

"I thought that I stood in a large and beautiful meadow, which lay a
short distance from the house in which we lived, and that everything
around me wore an aspect of peculiar pleasantness. The first thing that
attracted my special attention in this magnificent meadow, was a very
pure and clear stream of water, which ran through the midst of it; and
as I traced this stream, I discovered two trees standing upon its
margin, both of which were on the same side of the stream. These trees
were very beautiful, they were well proportioned, and towered with
majestic beauty to a great height. Their branches, which added to their
symmetry and glory, commenced near the top, and spread themselves in
luxurious grandeur around. I gazed upon them with wonder and admiration;
and after beholding them a short time, I saw one of them was surrounded
with a bright belt, that shone like burnished gold, but far more
brilliantly. Presently, a gentle breeze passed by, and the tree
encircled with this golden zone, bent gracefully before the wind, and
waved its beautiful branches in the light air. As the wind increased,
this tree assumed the most lively and animated appearance, and seemed to
express in its motions the utmost joy and happiness. If it had been an
intelligent creature, it could not have conveyed, by the power of
language, the idea of joy and gratitude so perfectly as it did; and even
the stream that rolled beneath it, shared, apparently, every sensation
felt by the tree, for, as the branches danced over the stream, it would
swell gently, then recede again with a motion as soft as the breathing
of an infant, but as lively as the dancing of a sunbeam. The belt also
partook of the same influence, and as it moved in unison with the motion
of the stream and of the tree, it increased continually in refulgence
and magnitude, until it became exceedingly glorious.

I turned my eyes upon its fellow, which stood opposite; but it was not
surrounded with the belt of light as the former, and it stood erect and
fixed as a pillar of marble. No matter how strong the wind blew over it,
not a leaf was stirred, not a bough was bent; but obstinately stiff it
stood, scorning alike the zephyr's breath, or the power of the mighty
storm.

I wondered at what I saw, and said in my heart, What can be the meaning
of all this? And the interpretation given me was, that these personated
my husband and his oldest brother ,Jesse Smith; that the stubborn and
unyielding tree was like Jesse; that the other, more pliant and
flexible, was like Joseph, my husband; that the breath of heaven, which
passed over them, was the pure and undefiled Gospel of the Son of God,
which Gospel Jess would always resist, but which Joseph, when he was
more advanced in life, would hear and receive with his whole heart, and
rejoice therein; and unto him would be added intelligence, happiness,
glory, and everlasting life."

-Lucy Mack Smith

Intro

I love you Mom. Sometimes we don't say these words enough to the people
to whom they matter the most.

Mormon Congregations everywhere will be celebrating Mother's Day this
weekend. What is it we're celebrating when we thank our Mothers on this
day? I got a facebook message from Shaun who's giving a talk in
Sacrament meeting this weekend about mothers and the ensuing
conversation made me think about the Mothers of Mormonism. They weren't
just broodmares with massive families, they were caretakers and drivers
of society in so many respects. Today, we're going to hear the stories
of some of the most prominent mothers in Zion, Lucy Mack Smith,
Elizabeth Ann Whitney, and a number of other prominent figures who
seemed to capture everything it was to be a true Mother of Zion. They
were caretakers, they were loving and loved, they accomplished
incredible feats when all the odds were against them. What lessons can
we take from their incredible stories?

Gender roles in the Church and its history are clearly rooted in the
culture and world from whence the religion sprang, so maybe it's worth
taking a step back to appreciate the ways that everybody contributed to
building the Mormon kingdom, as opposed to simplistically viewing the
history of a patriarchal religion through the eyes of the men who
recorded their own influence on its history and origin. Let's take this
Mother's Day as an opportunity to talk about the Mothers of Mormonism,
using mostly church-approved sources.

Immediately we run into a bit of a blind spot when it comes to studying
the Mothers of Mormonism. Mormon history has largely been recorded by
men in leadership positions who had little reason to include the role of
the women in their lives who impacted the history in less-direct ways.
Much of our examination today will surrounding the women whose role was
often that of supporting the men in the early church. This isn't a
weakness of the examination but rather a weakness in how the history
itself was initially recorded. The roles of women and mothers within the
Church seem dictated by society at large which had their respective
roles structured to support the men by whom these women were surrounded.
It's tough to examine Mormonism apart from the founding father, Joseph
Smith. Today, we're going to examine the support structure various
Mothers provided the founding prophet in order to enable him to create
Mormonism.

You only see the actors on the stage, but the stage crew, producers,
writers, musicians, lighting crew, sound engineers are the people who
make the actors shine. Let's talk about the people who truly kept
Mormonism running on the back end; those who never get the awards, never
get their own revelations, and so often have their role simply reduced
to the husbands they married or the children they bore; and we mustn't
lose sight of the importance of mothers' role in any historical
narrative.

Let's start at the beginning. If not for Mother Lucy Mack Smith, the
Smith family physically and spiritually never would have survived, much
less been in a place to allow Mormonism to evolve out of the world in
which the Smith family lived.

From a very young age, Lucy was brought up in a family with a father,
Solomon Mack, who was constantly occupied in providing for the entire
Mack family. A revolutionary war veteran and member of the various
militia forces fighting off the natives throughout the earliest
foundational decades prior to the Declaration of Independence. Lydia
Gates and Solomon Mack met sometime in 1759 and were married shortly
after. Lydia Gates Mack bore Lucy Mack on July 8, 1776. Lydia provided
the necessary education to her sons and daughters in the fields of
farming, homemaking, and religion.

When Lucy Mack was a mere 8 years old, her mother fell deathly ill.

From the history of Joseph Smith the Prophet by his mother beginning
page 36:

"When I arrived at the age of eight years, my mother had a severe fit of
sickness. She was so low that she, as well as her friends, entirely
despaired of her recovery. During this sickness she called her children
around her bed, and, after exhorting them always to remember the
instructions which she had given them---to fear God and walk uprightly
before Him, she gave me to my brother Stephen, requesting him to take
care of me, and bring me up as his own child, then bade each of us
farewell."

It was luckily a false alarm, Lucy Mack continues:

"This my brother promised to do; but, as my mother shortly recovered, it
was not necessary, and I consequently remained at my father's house
until my sister Lovisa was married."

In her religious upbringing, it seems Mother Lucy was taught to revere
and fear God, yet be beholden to no specific religion. She experienced
spiritual turmoil throughout her teenage and young adult years. Finally,
when toiling over the death of her sister, Lovina, Lucy Mack was racked
with torment concerning which of all the religions was the one true
religion. She was so concerned with every religion and what they would
say hinging upon her decision to join one or the other. This eventually
led to an epiphany that maybe none of them are the true Church of
Christ. Her mindset was similar to many restorationists of her day.

"For I was pensive and melancholy, and often in my reflections I thought
that life was not worth possessing.

In the midst of this anxiety of mind, I determined to obtain that which
I had heard spoken of so much from the pulpit---a change of heart.

To accomplish this, I spent much of my time in reading the Bible, and
praying; but, notwithstanding my great anxiety to experience a change of
heart, another matter would always interpose in all my meditations---If
I remain a member of no church, all religious people will say I am of
the world; and if I join some one of the different denominations, all
the rest will say I am in error. No church will admit that I am right,
except the one with which I am associated. This makes them witnesses
against each other; and how can I decide in such a case as this, seeing
they are all unlike the Church of Christ, as it existed in former days!"

Soon after this, Lucy Mack met Joseph Smith Sr.

"While I remained at Tunbridge, I became acquainted with a young man by
the name of Joseph Smith, to whom I was subsequently married."

Lucy Mack and Joseph Smith married in January of 1796 and Lucy's
brother, Stephen Mack, provided the young couple a wedding gift of
\$1,000. This money was subsequently lost by Joseph Sr. in his ginseng
business deal which went awry, leaving Lucy Mack and the rest of the
Smith family to be incredibly resourceful throughout 1800-1830 to make
ends meet. Nothing went to waste. Every family member contributed
anything they could to keep the house going and everybody had to pull
their own weight. While Joseph Sr. was off with his friends hunting
buried treasure, digging wells, and getting hammer-smashed drunk, Lucy
Mack was left home with the 10 kids raising them, giving them spiritual
guidance, and teaching them the skills they would need to be citizens
contributing to society in positive ways.

Her acumen as mother was tested constantly through trial and
tribulation. Sickness ravaged the Smith family. One child would fall ill
and it wasn't long before unsanitary conditions and lacking medical care
left the rest of the children sick. A person only has so much energy and
mental faculties to devote to any given task. Once reaching greater than
3 to 4 children, it becomes a system where the older children raise the
younger children and Mom is so frazzled and overworked with no sleep and
less than sufficient nutrition to be the best mother she could be. The
Smith family relied so heavily on Mother Lucy during the best and worst
of times to keep the family afloat. Seemingly, against all odds, Lucy
and Joseph Sr. somehow provided for the entire Smith family of 13 at
this time when young Joseph Jr. was but a we little lad.

"As our children had, in a great measure, been debarred from the
privilege of schools, we began to make every arrangement to attend to
this important duty. We established our second son Hyrum in an academy
at Hanover; and the rest, that were of sufficient age, we were sending
to a common school that was quite convenient. Meanwhile, myself and
companion were doing all that our abilities would admit of for the
future welfare and advantage of the family, and were greatly blessed in
our labours."

When the typhus fever hit the family, Lucy was dragged to the absolute
end of her wits in caring for the children.

"But this state of things did not long continue. The typhus fever came
into Lebanon, and raged tremendously. Among the number seized with this
complaint were, first, Sophronia; next Hyrum, who was taken while at
school, and came home sick; then Alvin; in short, one after another was
taken down, till all of the family, with the exception of myself and
husband, were prostrated upon a bed of sickness."

As a mother and caretaker of 11 children with a husband who has a very
hard time holding his liquor, Lucy Mack truly was an incredible human
being. Not an incredible woman.... An incredible human being. No matter
how we try, we can't even begin to imagine what this must have been like
to live through for everybody in the family.

Sophronia was the most-ill of the children when the fever first struck
the family. She was bedridden for upwards of 3 months with Lucy caring
for her, cleaning her, administering medicine, and weeping by
Sophronia's bedside when the doctor condemned her to death, saying "she
was so far gone, it was not for her to receive any benefit from
medicine, and for this cause he discontinued his attendance upon her."

When Sophronia finally clawed back from the edge of the abyss, this was
the scene.

"The ensuing night, she lay altogether motionless, with her eyes wide
open, and with that peculiar aspect which bespeaks the near approach of
death. As she thus lay, I gazed upon her as a mother looks upon the last
shade of life in a darling child. IN this moment of distraction, my
husband and myself clasped our hands, fell upon our knees by the
bedside, and poured out our grief to God, in prayer and supplication,
beseeching him to spare our child yet a little longer...

When we first arose from prayer, our child had, to all appearance,
ceased breathing. I caught a blanket, threw it around her, then, taking
her in my arms, commenced pacing the floor. Those present remonstrated
against my doing as I did, saying, "Mrs. Smith, it is all of no use; you
are certainly crazy, your child is dead." Notwithstanding, I would not,
for a moment, relinquish the hope of again seeing her breathe and live.

This recital, doubtless, will be uninteresting to some; but those who
have experienced in life something of this kind are susceptible of
feeling, and can sympathize with me. Are you a mother who has been
bereft of a child? Feel for your heart-strings, and then tell me how I
felt with my expiring child pressed to my bosom! Would you at this
trying moment feel to deny that God had "power to save to the uttermost
all who call on Him"! I did not then, neither do I now.

At length she sobbed. I still pressed her against my breast, and
continued to walk the floor. She sobbed again, then looked up into my
face, and commenced breathing quite freely. My soul was satisfied, but
my strength was gone. I laid my daughter on the bed, and sunk by her
side, completely overpowered by the intensity of my feelings.

From this time forward Sophronia continued mending, until she entirely
recovered."

When the typhus struck young Jo, among all of Lucy's other obligations,
now she was forced to carry the 8-year-old child in her arms because the
infection had spread to his leg making him unable to walk.

"His leg soon began to swell, and he continued to suffer the greatest
agony for the space of two weeks longer. During this period, I carried
him much of the time in my arms, in order to mitigate his suffering as
much as possible; in consequence of which, I was taken very ill myself.
The anxiety of mind that I experienced, together with physical
overexertion, was too much for my constitution, and my nature sunk under
it."

With the weight of the world, 10 sick children slowly getting better,
and a worsening Joseph Jr., Lucy was understandably stressed and anxious
to the point of a psychological break. A few weeks later, young Jo
underwent the dreaded leg-bone scraping surgery which must have caused
his mother caretaker immeasurable amounts of anguish and emotional
turmoil knowing the leg and life of her son was completely out of her
control, ceded to doctors trying an experimental procedure to save the
young boy's leg.

"They \[the doctors\] being seated, I addressed them thus: "Gentlemen,
what can you do to save my boy's leg?" They answered, "We can do
nothing; we have cut it open to the bone, and find it so affected that
we consider his leg incurable, and that amputation is absolutely
necessary in order to save his life."

With so much stress already, being told by doctors that they're about to
cripple your son for the rest of his life in a day and age where the
mentally or physically handicapped were relegated to vagabond status for
their entire lives must have simply crushed Lucy's spirit. She fought
back.

"This was like a thunder bolt to me. I appealed to the principal
surgeon, saying, "Dr. Stone, can you not make another trial? Can you
not, by cutting around the bone, take out the diseased part, and perhaps
that which is sound will heal over, and by this means you will save his
leg? You will not, you must not, take off his leg, until you try once
more. I will not consent to let you enter his room until you make me
this promise."

Lucy's version of this story is obviously dramatized, but that says
nothing to take away from the reality and horror of the situation. Lucy
was understandably in a fragile state and desired nothing more than to
be in control of the situation. Unfortunately, disease is no respecter
of persons and doesn't care what you think of it. Lucy was sent out of
the room and Joseph Sr. stayed to hold his son down on the operating
table. The cries of her son in agony were too much for Lucy to bear.

"When the third piece was taken away, I burst into the room again---and
oh, my God! What a spectacle for a mother's eye! The wound torn open,
the blood still gushing from it, and the bed literally covered with
blood. Joseph was as pale as a corpse, and large drops of sweat were
rolling down his face, whilst upon every feature was depicted the utmost
agony!

I was immediately forced from the room, and detained until the operation
was completed; but when the act was accomplished, Joseph put upon a
clean bed, the room cleared of every appearance of blood, and the
instruments which were used in the operation removed, I was permitted
again to enter."

A scene like that stays with a parent forever. The screams of her son,
the bed soaked in his blood, the open wound on his leg, and the
powerlessness Lucy must have felt knowing she could do nothing to bring
the suffering to an end; all this while in an already strained mental
and emotional state. The scenario for young Joseph would fade from
memory, the horrors of that day would stay with Lucy for the rest of her
days.

Lucy was a prominent mother throughout the entirety of Mormon history.
She was likely in attendance at the commencement of the church, she was
there during parts of the translation process, she was there when Jo
brought home his new wife, Emma, after they'd eloped. Lucy was a mother
worth proper veneration and reverence when we consider how much she
contributed and sacrificed for her family. From the simplest tasks of
caretaking, to the utmost extremities which pushed her mothering to the
breaking point, Lucy was truly an incredible human being.

When the Church of Christ experienced its first mass exodus, a
revelation was delivered through Jo commanding the Mormons to leave
their possessions behind and get thee to the Ohio. The first
acquaintance Jo and Emma made upon their arrival was Newel K. and
Elizabeth Ann Whitney.

The Whitney family was the first family the young couple, Joseph and
Emma Smith, lived with when they first arrived in Kirtland, less than a
year after the Book of Mormon was published and the Church had been
established. The Whitneys were hospitable and accommodating enough to
offer a room on the top floor of their home for the young Smith family
to move in to. Emma was about 5 months pregnant with twins at the time
and the young couple had not a dime to their name. The Smith's quickly
became attached to the Whitneys. Newel Whitney was called as a Bishop
after consecrating much of his property to building up the kingdom which
we'll discuss momentarily. Elizabeth Ann Whitney, however, became the
primary caretaker of the prophet and his pregnant wife and thus earned
the endearing nickname of "Mother Whitney".

Elizabeth Ann and Newel were married in October 1822 in Kirtland where
Newel was beginning to build his business empire. She was truly beloved
by every person who knew her and earned her spot as a prominent and
powerful individual throughout all of Mormon history. Her spirit of
hospitality and caring made her nickname of Mother Whitney extend beyond
just the Prophet referring to her as such, all the Mormons knew her as
Mother Whitney, especially in Utah given her status and career.

There's a wonderful article on lds.org about the Whitney family written
in 1978 by D. Michael Quinn titled the Newel K. Whitney Family. You'll
find a link in the show notes. Quinn describes Mother Whitney with
passing depth, but captures her role in the Mormon community in a
properly concise manner. He describes how she was shouldered with
heavier parenting duties upon the Church's arrival when Newel was given
elite status in the Mormon hierarchy.

In Elizabeth Ann, Newel's wife, we see another pattern---that of the
devoted, spiritual woman who strengthens her family and associates,
performing in her home and ward the same kind of function that her
husband was performing for the Church as a whole. When she was nearly
twenty-two years old and Newel K. Whitney was twenty-seven, they married
at Kirtland on 20 October 1822. "Ours was strictly a marriage of
affection. Our tastes, our feelings were congenial, and we were really a
happy couple, with bright prospects in
store."[^[5]{.ul}^](https://www.lds.org/ensign/1978/12/the-newel-k-whitney-family?lang=eng#note5-) She
bore eleven children during the next twenty-four years and adopted
several homeless children.

After her husband's call as bishop over the Church in the Ohio area, she
found that many of Newel's hours at home with the family were now
sacrificed to Church assignments. "During all these absences and
separations from my husband, I never felt to murmur, or complain in the
least ... yet I was more than satisfied to have him give all, time,
talents, and ability into the service of the Kingdom of God; and the
changes in our circumstances and associations which were consequent upon
our embracing the Gospel, never caused me a moment's
sorrow."[^[6]{.ul}^](https://www.lds.org/ensign/1978/12/the-newel-k-whitney-family?lang=eng#note6-) 

Now for a thought exercise. I'm going to read from earlier in the
article where it speaks of Newel's incredulous brother, Samuel. Samuel
wasn't enchanted by the prophet as his brother and sister-in-law, Newell
and Elizabeth were. For this thought exercise, I'm going to switch out
Samuel's name with that of Elizabeth, Newel's wife, to see what it may
look like if she didn't agree with Newel's devotion to the prophet. What
could she do? She didn't have legal right to own property or vote, she
probably wouldn't be getting half of Newel's businesses in a divorce; so
let's work with a hypothetical that maybe she was skeptical of the
prophet, but locked in a marriage with so many children that she had no
other options than to go along with her husband's decisions.

Once again from Quinn, with the brother Samuel exchanged for wife
Elizabeth:

"When Newel demonstrated his devotion by consecrating his prosperous
business at Kirtland to the service of the Church, Samuel(Elizabeth)
concluded that his brother had been defrauded. Samuel could not
comprehend the faith that enabled Newel to forsake his Kirtland
properties when the Church left in 1838, nor could he be comforted when
Newel lost his property to Missouri mobs that same year. When Samuel
visited his elder brother in Nauvoo in the 1840s, he saw only the
contrast between the poverty of the Saints and the magnificence of the
temple they sacrificed to build. Samuel managed Newel's financial
affairs in Kirtland, but he frequently urged Newel to forsake the
Mormons. The brothers continued to love and respect each other, but
Samuel never stopped grieving over Newel's choice, just as Newel mourned
Samuel's rejection of the restored gospel."

Who knows where Elizabeth Ann Whitney was in her belief system. Given
her actions throughout her entire timeline within Mormonism, one would
be at pains to claim she wasn't a sincere believer and honest in her
dealings with her fellow Saints. Elizabeth was one of the elite women of
Mormonism. Her status as Mother Whitney elevated her among the small
group of women in Nauvoo and Utah who would forever be the most
well-treated and prominent female members of society. Elizabeth Ann
Whitney ran in circles with Zina Huntington, Eliza Snow, and Presindia
Lathrop Huntington. Particularly in Utah, but in Nauvoo as well, these
women were absolutely integral to the survival of the Mormons.

One of the primary roles of women in the Relief Society was the physical
and spiritual relief of the Saints. When it came to blessing and
anointing the sick, a priesthood holding man would often pop in, provide
a priesthood blessing, and then immediately leave to go about his other
business or Church obligations. More often than not, the women of the
Relief Society were the people sticking around and administering
medicine to those with ailments. Women in labor particularly relied upon
the women to deliver the child and provide medicinal and spiritual
support during the painful and often deadly ordeal. Eliza Snow said as
much in the 1884 Woman's Exponent in Utah when discussing the priesthood
rights and privileges of the Relief Society, and I'm quoting this from
Carol Cornwall Madsen's article in the Dialogue Journal titled Mormon
Women and the Struggle for Definition. You'll find a link in the show
notes.

"...The Relief Society did not consider itself just a ladies\'
auxiliary.

Through it the women of the Church had been given a vehicle by which
their voices could be heard, their capabilities utilized, their
contributions valued.

In the process of organizing the women into the structure of the Church,
Joseph opened other significant avenues of participation. At the 28
April 1842 meeting, he affirmed their right to use spiritual gifts,
which were freely exercised in the early days of the Church. The gift of
tongues had rested on many of the sisters of the Church since its
beginning, and others had testified to receiving the power to rebuke
evil spirits and to prophesy. At issue at this particular meeting in
Nauvoo was the right of women to lay on hands for the purpose of
healing. Some were ordained for this purpose, Joseph explained to the
Relief Society women, but, he assured them, anybody could do it who had
the faith or if the sick had the faith to be healed by that
administration.13 These were gifts of the spirit, he told them,
designated to follow all believers. They were gifts of faith given to
the faithful, irrespective of gender or age. One member of the General
Retrenchment Association described her own healing at the hands of her
young son whose \"perfect and pure faith in the power and mercies of God
had claimed for her the blessings which he asked in childish simplicity
and trust.\"14

Again, Eliza was to lead as the practice of blessing one another through
laying on of hands and washing and anointing developed among the
sisters. She not only encouraged the use of these spiritual activities
but taught women the proper procedure. In a directive to the Relief
Society in 1884 she reminded the sisters that no special setting apart
was necessary for these administrations. \"Any and all sisters,\" she
said, who honor their holy covenants, not only have the right, but
should feel it a duty, whenever called upon, to administer to our
sisters in these ordinances; and we testify that when administered and
received in faith and humility they are accompanied with almighty
power.15"

Madsen goes on to describe the crucial role the women of the Relief
Society played in the childbirth process.

"Minutes of the women's organizations (Relief Society, YWMIA, and
Primary), personal diaries and letters attest to the efficacy of these
spiritual activites of the women, not only in healing the sick and
bringing comfort and solace to women in childbirth but in strengthening
the spiritual fibre of all who participated in them. Relief Society
testimony meetings were punctuated with demonstrations of the gift of
tongues and accounts of healings by the administration of sisters.
Washing and anointing a woman about to be confined for childbirth became
one of the most significant of these rituals, encouraged by their
leaders and sought after by the sisters themselves. At a time when women
continually faced the crushing burden of infant death as they gave birth
year after year---or even their own death---such administrations by
those who knew precisely the pangs of that burden had a deep and
personal meaning. The women must have experienced a unique transmittal
of energizing spiritual strength and support as they felt the knowing
and comforting hands of kindred souls placed upon them. These religious
practices became a source of spiritual bonding among the sisters of the
Church."

There's no other way of saying it. Without the women of the Relief
Society and the root and witching herb medical and maternity care they
provided, the Mormons in Nauvoo and Utah simply never would have
survived. If we're using the words Mother and Caretaker for our purposes
today, the caretaking these women provided for the ailing Saints was the
only way these people could survive given their circumstances.

Another aspect contributing to women being in these caretaker roles in
Nauvoo and Utah was simply the structure of society. Women's inability
to legally run a business or own property unless it was due to the
incapacity of their husband, nor could they sign contracts, negotiate
wages, and most other legal protections that men enjoyed, women couldn't
take part in. This legal and social structure inevitably resulted in the
number and types of jobs that women could fill being significantly
limited.

Eliza Snow recounts these medicinal and herbal remedies being used as
her own health was waning in 1886 in a letter she sent to Zina Diantha
Huntington.

From Compton's In Sacred Loneliness pg 339:

"Sister Thomas comes as regularly as the morning---does my marketing and
whatever I require. I think it was Tuesday after my arrival, Dr. Pratt
called. I described the condition of my lungs, and the next day she came
and brought not an apothecary shop, but a variety of medicines, which I
took as she directed, & they were truly {blest} to my healing. I am now
quite comfortable---rest pretty well nights---can now eat, not only
fresh vegetables, but a moderate quantity of bread. Have rode out a few
times---Sister Susan brings me a piece of Sacrament bread on Sundays,
which is a great comfort to me."

Patty Sessions left behind another letter swearing by the curative
powers of the oil the women of the Relief Society were administering
through blessing and anointing to heal the Mormons in Utah. While nearly
on her deathbed she wrote the following:

"...The lord has blessed me and Prospered me in all I have done for
which I feel very thankful, hoping he will continue to bless me while I
live both Spiritually and temporally, with all that shall be for my good
and \[h\]is Glory to give unto me I am now Almost eighty two years old
February next the 4^th^ I drink no tea nor coffee nor spirutous liquors
I don't smoke nor take snuff nor any poisonous medicine. I use
consecrated oil for my complaints. Now I say to you do as I have done
and as much better as you can and the Lord will bless you as he has me.
-Patty Sessions"

These religious practices to which Madsen was referring are small
gatherings of women in a secluded room partaking of their sacrament or
using anointing oil and chanting or speaking in tongues. Of these
meetings, Madsen quotes Emmeline B. Wells describing the joy she felt
when these women would congregate to worship, even speaking of Mother
Whitney when doing so.

"Looking back on a lifetime of sharing such experiences with other
women, Emmeline Wells recalled the "beautiful little meetings" which the
sisters often held in her home. She remembered \["\]the glorious
testimonies born by Sister Isabella Horne and Eliza Snow... and the
wonderful singing of Mother Elizabeth Ann Whitney \[in tongues\] with
its beautiful interpretation by Aunt Zina." These were women, she told a
new generation of Mormon sisters, "whom I loved as much as if bound by
kindred ties, closer, perhaps, because our faith and work were so in
tune with our everyday life." Access to this kind of spiritual power and
union by both women and men gave meaning to the concept of building a
community of Saints."

Building a community of Saints. The actors get all the credit, the
supporting staff, writers, stage crew et al are relegated to the
footnotes. Joseph Smith built Nauvoo out of a swampland, Brigham Young
built the Utah Basin out of an arid desert wasteland. Too often the
people truly responsible for all the work which actually goes into these
massive ventures get lost somewhere in the narrative and eventually lost
to history.

The truth of the matter is, everybody played their part in building the
Mormon theocracies somehow, someway, sometime. Every person, regardless
of how small a slice of the work pie they chewed on, each and every one
of the Saints devoted everything they had to build the Mormon Mecca du
jour. By this time, millions of people working endlessly, neglecting
their families, turning down that promotion at work because it means
they'd have to work on Sundays or it would interfere with their duties
as Relief Society president or Bishop, putting off that family vacation
until next year because they can't afford to pay tithing AND go on
holiday, all of these sacrifices, why? For those ever-crucial 6 words:
to build a community of saints.

These are merely modern sacrifices. During the religion's infancy, the
Saints sacrificed their lives. They signed over property, business, and
all worldly possessions to the kingdom. They didn't have money to feed
their families through the winter, yet they still paid money to building
a temple used for nothing other than magic ordinances. They forewent
education and career opportunities in order to fulfill both needs with
empty promises from clergy who didn't truly have their best interest in
mind. Sacrifice was a never-ending drain on these people, but the
underlying safety net always came down to a constant force for
guardianship and hospitality... Mom.

But is women's role in society best utilized when it stops at Mother and
caretaker? Mormon culture has a body of strong opinions concerning this.
We won't look back to Brigham Young or Heber C. Kimball for social
commentary, let's keep it within the realm of the last half-century.
These quotes aren't so much causal of Mormon culture as they're
indicative as a metric of Mormon culture.

\"Too many mothers work away from home to furnish sweaters and music
lessons and trips and fun for their children. Too many women spend their
time in socializing, in politicking, in public services when they should
be home to teach and train and receive and love their children into
security\" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 319).\
\
\"\[Women\], you are to become a career woman in the greatest career on
earth\--that of homemaker, wife, and mother. It was never intended by
the Lord that married women should compete with men in employment. They
have a far greater and more important service to render.\" (Ensign, June
1975, & From Faith Precedes the Miracle)\
\
\"Numerous divorces can be traced directly to the day when the wife left
the home and went out into the world into employment. Two incomes raise
the standard of living beyond its norm. Two spouses working prevent the
complete and proper home life, break into the family prayers, create an
independence which is not cooperative, causes distortion, limits the
family, and frustrates the children already born\" (Spencer W. Kimball,
San Antonio Fireside, Dec. 3, 1977, pp. 9-10 ).\
\
\" In the beginning, Adam\--not Eve\--was instructed to earn the bread
by the sweat of his brow. Contrary to conventional wisdom, a mother\'s
calling is in the home, not in the market place.\"\
(Ezra Taft Benson, To the Mothers in Zion, 1987)

Gordon B Hinckley, October 2006 Priesthood Session:\
\"\...young women are exceeding young men in pursuing educational
programs. And so I say to you young men, rise up and discipline yourself
to take advantage of educational opportunities. Do you wish to marry a
girl whose education has been far superior to your own?\"

Gordon B. Hinckley, closing remarks, April 2007 GC\
\"Husbands, love and treasure your wives. They are your most precious
possessions.\"

Elaine S Dalton, Jan 15, 2013\
\"Young women you will be the ones who will provide the example of
virtuous womanhood and motherhood. \... You will understand your roles
and your responsibilities and thus will see no need to lobby for
rights.\"

2 months after this quote was made its way into the public lexicon,
Ordain Women was organized by Kate Kelly.

One thing I think most of us will find agreeable is that Mormonism is a
product of its time and the culture by which it's surrounded. Whether
that's the early Mormonism we discuss in this show or the more modern
iterations, it developed from a world-wide culture where women have
historically been less empowered than men make accomplishments,
generally speaking of course. That's not to say women are somehow less
capable of making those accomplishments by design or anything, that's
patently absurd, it's merely to point out that it seems only recently
have women begun getting many of the rights and privileges most often
relegated to men throughout the majority of human history. This country
has been a sovereign nation for more than 300 years and for less than
1/3rd of that women have been able to vote. New Zealand was the first
country to allow women to vote nationwide and that was in 1893. The last
person to be born in the 1800s just died last year. In many countries
today, women still don't hold any political power, closer resembling
America 150 years ago in more respects than just suffrage.

Historians have indisputable proof of empires rising and falling from
over 4000 years ago beginning with the Akkadians. The first governmental
system we can call democracy was the Athenians around the 5^th^-century
B.C.E. Are we to truly believe that women have had nothing of substance
to contribute to the political realm until the most recent 5% of history
that democracies have been a viable system of government? And even this
metric is flawed because the right to vote doesn't automatically mean
complete gender equality.

I'm not trying to say anything about the way things ought to be, this is
a history podcast, not social commentary or politics, I'm merely
speaking to how things are and have been. But there's a reason one of my
favorite podcasts is My History Can Beat Up Your Politics because
history has an incredible way of putting, not just politics, but
everything into perspective.

We've made a lot of progress towards objective equality worldwide in the
past century. If you think we're done and everybody is truly equal
regardless of race, gender, gender identity, or sexuality, then the
conversation is over, right? We're done here. Mission accomplished,
perfect equality was achieved during the Civil Rights Movement and the
end of Apartheid was the cherry on top. The ways of our ancestors will
endure and we'll follow what our fathers taught us, just like their
fathers before them. Men will continue to be absentee breadwinners and
women the full-time homemaker and caregiver. It'll be the perfect 1950s
white picket-fence home, only without all the racism and sexism this
time around.

But, if you think there are some issues with society which could be
solved, or even somewhat mitigated, with a never-ending pursuit towards
greater equality, then we can begin having conversations about what
equality should look like. What is the best way to go about achieving
our collective goals of greater equality? Where do the most egregious
inequalities live in our respective societies? How can we cause social
change without leaving any minority behind? What does a truly equal
utopia look like and how do we all work towards achieving such an
abstract concept?

How do we progress? What does progress look like? Progress is
prospective, and we can only make it by understanding our legacy in
retrospect. Most importantly, we can't allow the progress people seek to
be mired in the virtues and dictates of our legacy.

Interview intro

Interview w/J.R. Becker

Annabelle &amp; Aiden peek outside

through their small window.

Through the trees, they see a bird

flying far too low.

The wind blows hard behind its wings.

It's going way too fast!

It tries to fly over the house,

but bangs into the glass!

They run outside to find the bird.

They see its crooked bill.

Its eyes closed, its belly up.

Its body silent still.

"Oh my gosh! What should we do?

Do you think that it's dead?

Let's find our friends to help us out,"

young Aiden quickly said.

All the friends were gathered

and stood around that bird.

Even Tom was deep in thought,

and not a sound was heard.

Annabelle asked, "What happens

when we have to say goodbye?

What happens when we leave this life?

What happens when we die?"

Outro
