---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 105 - Book of Abraham Logical pt1
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-105-book-abraham-logical-pt1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-105-book-of-abraham-logical-pt1
libsyn_embed: 6657212

category: History
date: 2018-05-31 22:19:26 PDT
redirect_from: /2018/05/32/ep-105-book-of-abraham-logical-pt1/
---

Ep 105 – Book of Abraham Logical pt1

On this episode, we jump into the logical deconstruction of the Book of
Abraham. We deal with the apologetic arguments made to claim the Book of
Abraham is ‘historically plausible’. Historically plausible doesn’t mean
probable or authentic, so what does it really mean? Can one believe in a
book of scripture if it’s ‘historically plausible,’ even if that
plausibility flies in the face of the historicity of the documents being
authentic? We take apologist arguments line by line and systematically
break them down into their constituent parts, hopefully arming you, the
listener, with an arsenal of arguments against the historicity of the
Book of Abraham.

Links:

Historical Plausibility: The Historicity of the Book of Abraham as a
Case Study  
<https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book>

MormonThink Book of Abraham essay  
<http://www.mormonthink.com/book-of-abraham-issues.htm#ref2>

Stephen E. Thompson essay on BoA  
<http://mit.irr.org/lds-egyptologist-doubts-joseph-smith-translated-book-of-abraham-egyptian-scroll>

Egyptology and the Book of Abraham Stephen E. Thompson  
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V28N01_155.pdf>

Joseph Smith Papers Egyptian materials  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/site/book-of-abraham-and-egyptian-material>

Translating the BoA in Joseph Smith Journal 1842  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/19>

Translating Egyptian into grammar and alphabet in Joseph Smith journal  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-1835-1836/4>

Egyptian grammar  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/grammar-and-alphabet-of-the-egyptian-language-circa-july-circa-november-1835/7>

Kerry Muhlstein Book of Abraham Challenges  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HMVX-Km_G6Y&list=PLNt4VOT9Z1fZNcekTzaV0Wbjx6kQTPlr4>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

BBCHolland clip

We’ve been covering the Book of Abraham for 2 weeks now. Part one was
the physical, tracking the papyri and cultural interest in Egyptology in
19<sup>th</sup>-century Western societies, colloquially referred to as
‘Egyptomania’. Part 2 covered the spiritual aspect of the Book of
Abraham. A lot of interesting doctrine and theology specific to
Mormonism comes from the Book of Abraham alone, including Kolob, belief
in gods instead of God, the Mormon creation passion narrative practiced
in the temple today, and the priesthood ban on any descendant of Cain.
Today we begin the logical deconstruction of the Book of Abraham. It’s
been a long wait getting to this portion of our examination and I hope
you all are looking forward to this just as much as I. We’re going to
examine arguments for and against the authenticity of the Book of
Abraham.

While compiling the notes for this episode, it just kept growing. It hit
the typical 15-page mark I use as an indicator for most episodes but
even then, I had only just begun this dirty deed of counter-apologetics.
I continued pulling apart the seams of the various essays and articles
used to form the apologetic arguments for the historicity of the Book of
Abraham and each eviscerated seam revealed a massive chasm with decades
of apologetics lying underneath. Eventually the notes grew to 20-25,
then nearly 30 pages and I realized the logical deconstruction of the
Book of Abraham would be more digestible split into 2 parts instead of a
single 3-hour lecture episode. So, my apologies for changing a 3-part
series into 4 parts, but I think by the end of it all you’ll agree that
it’s worth doing it this way.

Modern Book of Abraham apologetics all spawned with Hugh Nibley, one of
the most prominent Mormon apologists of the 20<sup>th</sup> century,
second only to B.H. Roberts. Nibley got his start in Mormon apologetics
in 1946 when he wrote his critique of Fawn Brodie’s No Man Knows My
History with his pamphlet entitled, No Ma’am, that’s not history,
sparking a long and colorful career in Mormon apologetics. He was the
frontrunner of all apologetics surrounding the Book of Abraham and most
arguments today have spawned or evolved from Nibley’s work. We won’t be
dealing much with Nibley today, instead we’ll focus on much more recent
work done in the apologetics for the Book of Abraham as they’re the
better-formulated, more potent and distilled, and often more powerful
arguments for the authenticity of the Book, all evolving from Nibley’s
work. We’ll focus on the literature provided by more recent Mormon
Egyptologists like Kerry Muhlstein, John Gee, Brian Hauglid, Mike
Rhodes, and Stephen Ricks, and I’ll be using skepticism informed by Rob
Ritner, a non-Mormon Egyptologist on a crusade to disprove the Book of
Abraham in order to rebut the arguments claimed by these Mormon
Egyptologists. Deconstructing the scholarly and academic apologetics
will be our focus for this episode. The information today will provide
the groundwork of counter-apologetics we’ll need for reading through the
Church’s official statement on the Book of Abraham, known as the
“Translation and the historicity of the Book of Abraham” in the
gospel-topics essays section which will be the focus of the next
episode. These gospel topics essays are where the Church attempts to
officially deal with extremely controversial subjects of its history and
spin them into a faith-promoting narrative. That essay is essentially
the distilled and shinnied up version of a bunch of apologetics all
cobbled together in 31 paragraphs to attempt minimizing the seriously
problematic aspects of Book of Abraham historicity, and carve out a
loophole for believing members to not view the Book of Abraham as
problematic so much as something for which we don’t have answers.

To lay the groundwork for our logical deconstruction of Book of Abraham
apologetics, let’s make some important distinctions. There’s the Book of
Abraham, which is the Mormon scripture published in March of 1842. The
Book of Abraham is separate and distinct from the Papyri Jo claimed to
have translated the Book of Abraham from. The papyri collection,
hereafter referred to as the Chandler collection, Michael Chandler being
who the Mormons purchased the collection from, is from a common funerary
text known as The Book of Breathings and The Book of the Dead, and the
claimed Book of Abraham papyri specifically were a breathing permit
created for the deceased Hor, or Horos-Re. Breathing permits were part
of the funeral rites practiced in Egypt during multiple dynasties, but
the papyri collection attained by Joseph Smith were part of the
Ptolemaic or Hellenistic period of Ancient Egypt which began around 330
B.C.E. and continued until about 30 B.C.E. Also, Abraham is a character
from the Bible with no contemporary source for his existence. His
timeline begins and ends by Genesis chapter 41 which was likely written
somewhere in the 7<sup>th</sup> or 8<sup>th</sup> century B.C.E, sourced
from Hebrew oral traditions passed down for generations. Abraham
supposedly lived from about 2000 B.C.E. to around 1850 B.C.E., about
1700 years prior to when the Chandler Papyri were created in Ptolemaic
Egypt. These distinctions separating biblical Abraham, the Chandler
Ptolemaic Egyptian Papyri, and the Book of Abraham are important to bear
in mind as we examine the papyri, the claimed timeline of Abraham, and
the Book of Abraham from the logical perspective. My biases on Mormon
history are abundantly clear, so it’s my sincere hope that you leave
this and next week’s episodes with a veritable arsenal of informed
arguments to use in debunking the Book of Abraham.

I want to be transparent here. I’ve read Rob Ritner’s book which makes a
compelling case against the authenticity of the Book of Abraham. I
haven’t read any books by Mormon apologists claiming an authentic
historicity for the Book of Abraham for a few reasons. I have, however,
read a LOT of articles by them which are just more concise iterations of
their arguments. A person can claim that the truth lies in the nuance
and that it takes all of these books to introduce and articulate the
necessary nuance to make the Book of Abraham authenticity a plausible
argument, but if the foundational arguments in the books are just
expanded versions of the arguments presented in these articles and
journal and those arguments are fundamentally flawed, why engage with
the expanded works? You can build incredibly beautiful and ornate
structures, but if the foundation is flawed, the structure is condemned.
We’ll go through some lines of argument provided to make the case for an
authentic Book of Abraham and point out any formal or informal logical
fallacies, any twisting or misrepresentations of the data, or anything
which could be perceived to be blatantly dishonest. Where nuance is
necessary to understand a larger point, I’ve done my best to go into
further investigation, which has usually led me to conclude just how
insidious the apologetics behind an authentic Book of Abraham really
are.

Let’s begin with talking about the methodology used to ascertain the
apologetic case for the authenticity of the Book of Abraham. When a case
is made for an authentic Book of Abraham, it simply cannot be proven to
be authentic. What Mormon Egyptologists have instead done is carve out a
complex and confusion system where it is historically plausible for it
to be what Joseph Smith claimed it to be. An authentic historical
document is much harder to prove than historical plausibility, and
you’ll hear that phrase thrown around a lot, but I want to be clear
about how much gravity the term ‘historical plausibility’ has. It’s
historically plausible that the Romans conquered the Americas and build
the Mayan civilization in 100 C.E. There’s absolutely no evidence for
it, but it feels like it could be true in my mind so I’ll therefore
consider it historically plausible. Historically plausible says nothing
of historical probability. Scientific theories are based on
probabilities and those probabilities are discovered by introducing
hypotheses which are plausible. Studying history isn’t a science, but
historical models are constructed in much the same way. Something is
introduced as historically plausible, the Romans build the Mayan
civilization, and then we use other evidence to ascertain historical
probability. Romans building the Mayan civilization is plausible because
I said it, but it runs counter to all archaeological, anthropological,
linguistic, and historical studies and therefore has a 0% chance of
being historically probable. Book of Abraham apologists will throw out
the term historical plausibility like it’s some level of proof over and
over again, when historical plausibility really comes down to being
equally as factual as your racist grandpa at thanksgiving saying I have
a theory that prisons are overrun by black people because they have the
mark of Cain. Sure grampy, you can live in your comfortable little world
of unsubstantiated plausibilities, I’ll live in a world where we’re
constrained by facts and deal in probabilities.

An article discussing the historical argument for an authentic Book of
Abraham is titled “Historical Plausibility: The Historicity of the Book
of Abraham as a Case Study,” published through and hosted on BYU.edu,
written by John Gee and Stephen Ricks, who frequently publish articles
and book on this subject. This article is dense but I’ve extracted what
I think captures their methodology of historical plausibility which
seems broadly applied by most apologists making the case for an
authentic Book of Abraham historical model. This article is largely
representative of many of the arguments made for the Book I’ve seen thus
far. You’ll find it linked in the show notes should you want to read it
in its entirety. Let’s get started.

*“In attempting to prove the historicity of any document or event,
historians should use primary sources. For the historian of the ancient
world, however, these sources are often both rare and obscure. By
comparing a text with other texts and archaeological material from the
same time and place, a historian can propose the historical plausibility
of a document when its authenticity is not certain. In order to
establish the Book of Abraham as a historically authentic ancient
document, one must consider many elements, including: setting; the
presence and nature of Egyptian influence in Abraham’s place and time,
including governmental, social, and religious institutions; and the
presence of comparable personal and place names in the ancient Near East
of Abraham’s day. Yet even under the best of circumstances, historical
plausibility establishes probability, not proof.*

“The historian of antiquity has to make do with what is available. How
does he or she determine whether a later secondary source is accurate?
For example, most of the history of ancient Israel is based on the books
of Samuel and Kings in the Bible. Yet those books were compiled at a
much later time—after all, they mention events in the “seven and
thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah” (2 Kgs.
25:27). [\[2\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn2)”

Right at the onset, this is equating the methods used to prove the
historicity of the Bible with the historicity of many other ancient
works not regarded as scripture. The vast majority of the occurrences in
the bible with a few notable exceptions simply cannot be corroborated by
outside contemporary sources which presents many challenges for
historians. Lack of outside sources to corroborate singularly-attested
events is a common lacking with many ancient historical sources. Due to
ancient documents’ obscurity and rarity, they often are only internally
consistent and can’t be proven by any outside primary or secondary
information. For example, we have Sumerian records of the fall of Israel
recounted in the Bible, but contemporary sources of the majority of
Bible prophets simply don’t exist. Most of the historicity of the Bible
only happens in the Bible as is the case with so many ancient documents.
That’s a rather sobering fact when examining the historicity of any
ancient source, Bible or otherwise. Intellectually honest historians
don’t regard the Bible and the events contained therein as unequivocal
fact, they merely grant historical plausibility to the events recorded
in the earliest manuscripts and assess probability based on how
outlandish a specific claim is. For example, documenting warring tribes
in the Bible, that has a high probability of having happened, even if
the dates, locations, and people involved can’t be proven as accurate
according to the Bible. A specific person rising from the dead after
being crucified, that simply could never be proven for myriad
understandable reasons. Jesus raising from the dead is historically
plausible because secondary, non-eyewitness people claimed it happened,
but the probability is absurdly low to the point of being not even worth
arguing. Establishing historical plausibility and assessing historical
probability are pillars to the field of historical studies, but they’re
separate and distinct and should never be conflated.

The article continues to qualify its methodology for evaluating the Book
of Abraham:

“Historical plausibility offers a possible solution to this sort of
problem. We will illustrate both the problem and the solution with the
Book of Abraham and several other ancient documents. We want to avoid
the sort of special pleading that is often applied to scriptural
texts—that because the texts are scriptural, they are not allowed the
latitude normally granted other texts.”

That line is important to discuss because they are acknowledging that
biases exist when historically examining a book of scripture, but not
the biases we would expect them to articulate. Essentially, the claim is
that books of scripture are more scrutinized because they are scripture,
thus making people more skeptical of the claims for that reason alone. I
seem to see that bias cutting the other way in so many instances, that
certain people don’t evaluate scripture with the same level of scrutiny
as they would other non-scriptural historical records because to do so
may cause them to not believe in it as scripture. I think the simple
existence of the entire field of apologetics surrounding the Books of
Abraham, Mormon, and the Bible makes that fact abundantly clear.
Religion poisons everything and that poisoning effect is felt heavily in
the field of historical studies surrounding religions. Being Mormons and
employed by BYU, which is owned by the Church, Ricks and Gee claim to
lay that bias aside with the rest of the paragraph by stating this:

“One of the ironies of historical plausibility is that “for the purpose
of the exercise, we shall suppose that, like the Babylonian and Egyptian
works, the Pentateuch \[or whatever work we are interested in testing,
such as the Book of Abraham\] has no religious relevance to us.”

Okay, the claim has been made, they will not be granting special
pleading to the Book of Abraham for their examination of the historicity
of the Book of Abraham by ignoring it because it’s scripture like most
historians do. I would argue that they’re making a case of special
pleading by granting the Book of Abraham status as scripture and
therefore exempt from many of the metrics by which historians usually
construct historicity or lack thereof, but let’s continue to walk
through more extracts to see how they make the case. Let’s see if those
religious and employment biases poison their presentation on the
historical plausibility of the Book of Abraham.

In order to establish the argument, the article begins with assuming a
false dichotomy for evaluating the accuracy of ancient documents:

“The problem centers around which of two mutually exclusive
methodological assumptions one chooses…

1\. Where no sound evidence exists to the contrary, an isolated
document, according to its capacity, is to be accepted as historically
accurate until proven otherwise. Without this principle, there would be
no hope of writing political history for ancient
Babylonia. [\[5\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn5)

2\. Undoubtedly many scholars still adhere to the opinion that the
statements of a source can be regarded as reliable as long as the
opposite has not been proved. It must be emphasized, however, that . . .
the burden of proof does not rest on the skeptical scholar but on the
scholar who accepts the statements of his source as credible evidence.”

I propose a third option without absolutes as were presented in these
assumptions. An isolated document exists and should be granted
historical plausibility with X degree of probability of accuracy
increasing as corroborating evidence supports it. However, if a fatal
flaw exists in the historicity of any document, such as anachronisms,
inconsistencies in narrative or content, or complete lack of
corroborating evidence, and historical consensus deems those flaws to be
truly fatal, the document in question should be abandoned as an accurate
document as its historical probability is reduced to 0% until other
outside evidence can mitigate that fatal flaw. Another point worth
adding, unanimity among historians for any given historical event
rarely, if ever, occurs. However, the variables of historical consensus
and historical probability scale in tandem with each other.

The BYU article continues to articulate how these methods will be
applied to the Books of Mormon and Abraham:

“Showing that the document is ancient is a sufficient condition for
establishing the historical accuracy of the Book of Mormon or the Book
of Abraham. Since both the Book of Mormon and the Book of Abraham are
often rejected as being neither ancient nor authentic simply by virtue
of the story of their translation, explaining how they can possibly be
historically plausible becomes more difficult than the alternative. …
Joseph Smith lived in a different culture separated in time, space, and
language from the books he translated. Thus this same test of historical
plausibility can and should also be applied to our study of the Book of
Abraham. Because the Book of Abraham is available to us only in
translation, considerations of layout, language, script, paleography,
and vocabulary play a much lesser
role. [\[32\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn32)Still,
considerations of genre, specificity, onomastics, and cultural referents
(including religious, social, and governmental institutions) can be
used.

Key to the discussion of the Book of Abraham as a historically authentic
ancient document is its likely setting (whether in northern or southern
Mesopotamia), the presence and nature of Egyptian influence in that part
of the world in the late third to early second millennia B.C. (the
likely time period for Abraham’s activities), and the presence of
comparable personal and place names in the Book of Abraham and in the
ancient Near East at that time.”

Let’s continue to let this article make the case for the Book of Abraham
from the apologetic stance before completely ripping the rug out from
under it in our conclusion. Gee and Ricks center around a few points
which seem to grant plausibility for the Book of Abraham being a
legitimate ancient text, but they fail to address the primary concern
which completely eradicates the need for any apologetics surrounding the
Book of Abraham. It makes arguments in the following categories: Genre,
Specificity, Onomastics (the study of proper nouns and place names),
Government, Social organization, and Religion.

In the Genre category, it establishes that the Book of Abraham is
autobiographical which is not completely unique in comparison to other
ancient Near East texts from the Ptolemaic period in Egypt. In response
to that, I’d just say that passion narratives, fictional writings,
religious texts, and a number of other genres occur much more frequently
with respect to the purported time frame of the Book of Abraham and
almost all writings from the Ptolemaic period across the entire Eastern
world were written in third person, making the first-person narrative in
the Book of Abraham nearly a complete outlier. This isn’t an argument
for the Book of Abraham being consistent with writings of a similar
date, it merely shows how relatively out of place the Book of Abraham is
with its claimed timeline. Even used as an apologetic, the genre
argument for the Book of Abraham’s authenticity is being wielded in the
wrong direction and only seems to exhibit it as an outlier given the
first-person narrative.

The next argument is specificity. It claims that because there’s no
“once upon a time” element, no anonymity about main characters, no
vagueness about locations, and no fantasies or magic marvels, that it
reads like a legitimate autobiography. To be clear, it recounts Abraham
speaking with God face to face, and God shows him visions of the
universe after saving Abraham’s life by the power of God from being
sacrificed on an altar…. Yeah, there’s no way to interpret that as
fictional. It goes on to argue that the place names listed in the Book
of Abraham all lie outside Egypt and therefore establish a believable
itinerary of Abraham before he arrived in Egypt. It lists Potiphar’s
Hill, the plains of Olishem, the land of Ur of Chaldea (which has its
own problems), Haran, Jershon, Shechem, Bethel, and Hai. Okay, all of
those might be places outside of Egypt through which Abraham travelled,
but granting that these place names being included in the Book of
Abraham somehow proves its authenticity is tantamount to saying that
Jason Bourne was a real person because the specific cities the Bourne
narrative lies somewhere in Russia, France, Britain, and the U.S. are
real places. Fictional narratives are often constructed on places which
really exist, it does not logically follow that those fictions are made
true solely because they are placed on real geography. This is a major
logical leap to the point that any logic completely and utterly breaks
down.

The next argument is Onomastics, or the study of names and proper nouns.
This is relatively dense for our purposes but suffice it to say if a
name crops up that’s completely out of place from Abraham’s day, like
say a Greco-Roman name in an Ancient Hebrew narrative, that’s an
anachronism and undermines the plausibility of the claimed book. The
article states the importance of onomastics with this paragraph:

“There must be a plausible use of personal names, that is, names of men,
gods, and places that fit the area and period of time. Some of these
names suggest a linguistic and cultural melting
pot, [\[84\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn84) but
it is better to concentrate on those names that are attested in the
proper time and
place. [\[85\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn85) That
there are few written documents from the region at the time of Abraham
means that we must usually cast our net wider to include examples from
other periods and areas.”

As with any historical studies, yes, onomastics are important. But, and
I truly cannot stress this enough, in order for it to prove authenticity
for the Book of Abraham, Joseph Smith couldn’t have had access to any
information about Ancient Egypt or the Bible, but we know his entire
world was based on the Bible and Egyptomania was a cultural driver in
Joseph’s day. With how popular Egyptology was in western societies
during his lifetime, he had access to these names and it should be no
surprise that we find them in the Book of Abraham. The breakdown here is
authorship attribution. Gee and Ricks have already assumed the Biblical
Abraham to be the author of the Book of Abraham, because that’s what it
says it is, but when we assume Joseph Smith as the author, all these
logical contradictions and grasping at straws completely evaporate.

The article goes on to articulate that many of the names included are of
Hebrew sound, which shouldn’t be surprising if the Hebrew father Abraham
wrote the Book but should be even less surprising when we know that
Joseph Smith studied Hebrew on and off throughout his ministry starting
in 1835 when the School of the Prophets hired Rabbi and Jewish Scholar,
Joshua Seixas, to teach them Ancient Hebrew. The article continues in
the onomastics section to describe Abraham’s invocation of various words
ascribed to locations, the objects observed by Abraham during his
visions, and the religious practices of the Egyptians. It’s important to
study the genesis of these words, but not when that genesis extends
beyond what Joseph Smith was exposed to or had some level of access to.
Most of them like Rahleenos, Mahmackrah, Elkenah, Libnah, Korash,
Olishem, have some level of Hebrew etymological similarities, but none
of them are real words. They came from, and once again I can’t stress
this enough, Joseph’s mind.

The article goes on to make the case that the government system
described in the Book of Abraham seems consistent with what Egyptology
would tell us. To the extent that the Book of Abraham describes Egyptian
government, this is logically consistent. Abraham tells us of the
Pharaoh, but withholds naming the specific Pharaoh, just naming the
office instead of the actual person, and lists priests. That’s the
extent Egyptian government is described in the Book of Abraham. This
would prove historical plausibility if no other government like that
described in the Book of Abraham ever existed, or if Egyptomania in
19<sup>th</sup>-century Western culture wasn’t a thing, but the vast
majority of historical governments have been made up of singular rulers
like a king or Pharaoh, with advisors who were religious as much as
government with the label of priests. To claim the Book of Abraham’s
vague inclusion of allusions to Egyptian government is an argument for
its authenticity is once again a case of special pleading and an
argument from historical ignorance when there is absolutely no evidence
to support the case. When one bases arguments on historical ignorance,
we end up with Hebrews coming to America in wooden submarines in
Abraham’s time.

The article then moves into the realm of social organization to makes
its argument for the authenticity of the Book of Abraham. It uses the
language of “land of Chaldeans,” and “land of Canaan” etc. to put
forward the claim that this was articulating political details of how
society was structured. This is what the article says:

“Egypt is clearly depicted as a state, while the land of Chaldea is a
smaller political entity, having some social order and controlling some
towns. But the lands of Canaan and Jershon are not political units, nor
does Haran control more than presumably its immediate surroundings. This
matches the picture of the Egyptian state during the Middle Kingdom as
well as what we know of the social organization of northern
Syria [\[143\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn143) and
the city states of the land of Canaan during the Middle Bronze Age II
period.”

Basing the argument that the Book of Abraham articulates accurate social
structure of Ancient Egypt using these scant few passages which are
merely referencing where Abraham supposedly travelled could be
classified as a reification fallacy by overstating the evidence and
reaching faulty generalizations based on the extremely limited data set
heavily impacted by historical ignorance. It’s tantamount to somebody
who said that they travelled to America, Mexico, Haiti, and the
Caribbean is somehow telling us anything about the political or social
structure of the American government. Everything about this line of
argumentation is flawed and it’s a vast overstatement of the evidence to
the point of either absurdity or blatant dishonesty, or possibly even
both.

The final line of argumentation made in the essay is on the basis of
Religion. It builds an entire case on the crocodile in the papyrus
facsimile 1 which Joseph ascribed to the idolatrous god of Pharaoh. I
simply can’t take issue with this line of argumentation because of lack
of education in Egyptology. The crocodile is interpreted in Egyptology
as the crocodile god Sobek, a lustful, aggressive, and carnal god. If
the label idolatrous, as used in the Book of Abraham, can be used to
represent any god other than Yahweh, then any religious text dealing
with any god other than Yahweh is, by this definition of the word,
idolatrous.

This isn’t a case of moving the goal posts fallacy, it’s a case of never
even putting the goal posts down in the first place. The entire argument
they build in defining Sobek as an idolatrous god fails to define what
was meant in the passage of the Book of Abraham where it uses the word
‘idolatrous,’ and you can’t argue when words are used so clumsily and
without any solid definition. You can’t argue with it, because no
argument has been presented in the first place. This line of
argumentation uses the fact that Joseph claimed the idolatrous god of
Pharaoh as the crocodile which strikes similarities with a specific god
described in Egyptology to build the case, yet ignores every single
other instance where the facsimiles didn’t match up with Egyptology,
making it a textbook Texas sharpshooter fallacy asserted based on
extremely faulty and vague assumptions.

Our analysis thus far has been sharply critical representing all the
simple formal and informal logical fallacies I could find in this
academic article written by John Gee and Stephen Ricks. A huge problem
exists in that I’m not trained in Egyptology and am only using critical
thinking and skepticism to point out what I see as weak points. My
biases are clear, as are the biases of anything coming out of BYU. That
point is driven home in the penultimate section in the article. We’ll
get to it momentarily, but let’s allow another Mormon Egyptologist,
Kerry Muhlstein, to make a few arguments and we’ll see what holes we can
poke in his apologetic defense of the authenticity of the Book of
Abraham.

I’m going to play a number of clips from a YouTube video series
published by FairMormon called Book of Abraham Challenges. It’s a series
of 14 videos, most of which are around 3 minutes long. You can get
through it in about half an hour and I would recommend doing so in order
to scratch the surface of the apologetic arguments being made. The
series is simply Kerry Muhlstein sitting in front of a camera and
talking about the Book of Abraham. Let’s go through a number of clips
and see what we can learn. Disclaimer time, I’m reproducing these for
the purposes of critique and criticism in an educational context which
falls well within fair use of creative commons licensing. None of these
clips are full reproductions, just extracts from the video clips and
you’ll find a link to the entire source video library in the show
notes. Those with finely-tuned ears for audio like yours truly will
probably hear some hard cuts in the audio clips. Those are not my cuts,
those are the original video cuts. I didn’t alter any of this audio. The
extracts we’ll be dealing with are completely intact from the original
video.

Let’s begin with Muhlstein’s interactions with other Egyptologists in
his studies surrounding the Book of Abraham.

Other Egyptologists Opposed

He starts this clip by championing how unique Mormonism is and basically
implies that everybody not a member out there is somehow aligned in
opposition to Mormon Egyptologists. Then he goes on to tell us that
there’s an anti-religious undertone in academia and that academics are
out to disprove anything related to religion. That is a hopeless
straw-man argument. He’s implying that all academia is on some kind of
anti-holiness crusade to disprove something just because it is
religious. I think he’s either ignorantly or deliberately missing the
point that academia isn’t anti-religious, it’s pro-facts. So many
religions are anti-facts, which by transitive property makes academia
somewhat anti-religion because it’s constrained by those pesky things we
call facts and theories. Due to the ignorance of this statement, whether
deliberate and willful, or just simple ignorance, this is a fallacious
argument and plays well into the persecution narrative so lovingly
embraced by so many Mormons.

After that he goes on to articulate an issue for Egyptologists when it
comes to Joseph Smith’s translation methods in comparison to the broader
world of Egyptology just burgeoning at the time. Yes, Joseph Smith
claimed to be able to translate Egyptian before the discipline of
verifiable Egyptology had spread to America, but it’s wrong. His
translation is wrong, therefore his claim to be able to translate
Egyptian is wrong. Then he states that a lot of people just like Joseph
Smith claimed they could translated Egyptian hieroglyphs before
Champollion’s work was well-known, but they all fell by the way-side,
whereas people still continue to believe in Joseph’s translation, which
is 100% incorrect I might add, and asks why that is. Jo claimed to
translate by divine inspiration, not by grammar or any of those boring
scientific methods, but by power from God, and it got it completely
wrong\! What does that say about Jo’s version of God and how his methods
don’t match up with science? Why would that bother scientists when they
see their colleagues believing in something that’s demonstrably false?
This whole clip smacks of deliberate and willful ignorance and shows
that Muhlstein’s, and all Mormon Egyptologists’, work surrounding Book
of Abraham Egyptology is done with ulterior motives and does not deserve
academic respect. His view that this is due to some kind of
anti-religious or anti-Mormon slant in academia is misplaced because
academia is anti-falsehood and he’s perpetuating falsehoods.

BoA not from Fac 1

A couple of points to contend with in this clip. First off, yes, the
majority of the Chandler Papyrus collection was lost in the Great
Chicago fire of 1871 and the only way Egyptologists can surmise what was
included in that collection is by comparing other funerary texts to the
Chandler collection and assuming similarities. The Book of the Dead and
Book of Breathings were long and short papyrus scrolls respectively.
They were permits issued to high-ranking deceased individuals in
Egyptian society to guide them into the afterlife. Think of them as a
religious death certificate and final blessing in Christian traditions,
only written on papyrus scrolls. Each book was made for the individual
for whom the books were made and detailed their familial lineage, but
the template for most of these Books of Breathings and Books of the Dead
are largely similar. It so happens that the Chandler collection was
created for Hor, presumably the mummy with whom the papyri were buried
as these death certificates were usually clutched in the arms of the
mummified person for whom they were written. If the Book of Abraham was
somehow part of the lost section of the collection, it would be a
singular occurrence that flies in the face of everything Egyptology
would intuit about similar kinds of funerary papyri. The claim Muhlstein
is making here is that the Book of Abraham text is not taken from the
accompanying facsimile 1 which was printed at the beginning of the Book
of Abraham when it was published in 1842. This is one of the primary
claims of most apologists and it’s simply wrong.

Jo, Warren Parrish, and William Wines Phelps began creating their
alphabet and grammar system when they first attained the Chandler
collection in 1835. From July to November, Jo read the Egyptian papyri
around Facsimile 1, while these scribes created multiple notebooks which
have the Egyptian symbols in the left column of the notebooks and the
interpretation of the characters to the right. Those Egyptian characters
are exactly the characters surrounding Facsimile 1 and the translation
in the notebook next to the characters are the constituent parts of the
current first and a few verses of the second chapters of the Book of
Abraham. Furthermore, Facsimile 1 has a numbered explanation with
corresponding numbers describing the scene in the cut which describes
exactly what is happening in the first chapter of the Book of Abraham.
I’ll use Muhlsteins words here, if a person claims that the Book of
Abraham was not translated from the Egyptian hieroglyphics around
Facsimile 1, it flies in the face of everything the majority of
historians would conclude about the history of the Book of Abraham and
the Chandler papyri collection.

To further the point, in another video, he seems to conclude that the
struggle of Abraham with the idolatrous priest of Elkenah depicted in
the Facsimile 1 and recounted in the first chapter of the Book of
Abraham does, indeed, come from the Facsimile. Let me describe Facsimile
1 for anyone who hasn’t seen it before. It’s a picture of a priest over
a person lying on a table that looks like a lion. The priest is holding
a knife over the figure on the table and the figure has his two hands up
in the air looking like he’s fending off the attack. The only problem
is, that part of the papyri was filled in by Joseph Smith. When the
Chandler collection fell into Jo’s possession, a chunk of the papyri in
the shape of the state of Florida is was missing, cutting off the head
of the priest and only showing the lower limbs and head of the person
lying on the table. Jo filled it in incorrectly. An original intact
Breathing Permit like this has the priest with an Anubis head, the
Egyptian Jackal popular culture associates with Egypt and the person
lying on the table has one hand down holding his erect penis while the
other is up near his face. Additionally, there’s a bird with an extended
wing above the person lying down which runs parallel to the lying-down
person’s upraised hand. Jo filled in the missing piece with a fully
clothed Abraham on the lion table, which he called an altar, and the
left wing of the bird became the person’s other hand.

In this audio clip, Muhlstein describes Facsimile 1 as if the original
looked exactly as Jo filled it in to look, but Facsimile 1 looks nothing
like what other original Breathing Permits look like. This seems
deliberately dishonest in my opinion coming from somebody who definitely
knows better than for this to be just a simple oversight. Have a listen
and think about what he says for yourself…

Abrahams struggle

It looks like a struggle… Yes, because that’s how Jo filled in the
missing part of the picture. There are many other images accessible
online which depict similar lion couch scenes on papyri and none of them
look like what Joseph Smith interpolated in his drawing to fill in the
missing portion, or lacuna, as it’s called in textual analysis. Any
Egyptologist looking at modern pictures of Facsimile 1 can tell that it
was filled in incorrectly and for somebody who spends so much time
studying and writing about the Book of Abraham and Facsimile 1,
Muhlstein definitely knows better and this is outright dishonest, I
can’t see any other way of interpreting this information.

Muhlstein continues to focus on the sacrifice of Abraham in Facsimile 1
and the text of the Book of Abraham and makes the argument that human
sacrifice was much more frequent in ancient Egypt than initially
perceived, thus Abraham being almost sacrificed, yet saved by the spirit
of the Lord, isn’t so far out of the realm of plausibility.

Ancient Texts about Abraham Sacrifice

I haven’t read the book to which Muhlstein is referring so I can’t
debunk the information contained therein. I would merely add that it
shouldn’t be surprising that human sacrifice happened in Ancient Egypt.
There were a few scenarios which non-Mormon Egyptologists have clearly
identified when human sacrifice would happen, and there could be some
plausibility that some sacrifices were performed because of blasphemers
as Abraham would have been seen to be. That human sacrifice occurred in
Ancient Egypt does not prove the authenticity of the Book of Abraham,
but merely that the claim of Abraham being offered as a sacrifice is
plausible as depicted in the already proven-to-be inaccurate filling in
of the lacuna of Facsimile 1. Here’s a little context for when
Egyptologists know that human sacrifice did occur.

“The two definitions of human sacrifice that could be applied to the
very early development of ancient Egypt are:

  - The ritual killing of human beings as part of the offerings
    presented to the gods on a regular basis, or on special occasions.

  - Retainer sacrifice, or the killing of domestic servants to bury them
    along with their master.

*-- Human Sacrifice, Jacques Kinnaer”*

The article on touregypt.net does go on to say that human sacrifices to
the gods may have been in the form of slaying criminals and prisoners of
war, which Abraham may have fallen into that category. But, once again,
because this sacrificial ritualism did happen does not increase the
probability that the Book of Abraham is true by one iota of historical
measurement. This is text-book cherry-picking data to make it fit into
an assumption that the Book of Abraham is true.

Next, I’m going to play two clips which seem to go together really well
and fairly pose the great challenge that historical research into
ancient near-east cultures is. Egypt, especially as we get closer to the
Ptolemaic era, was a massive empire with a ton of documentation to
provide windows into what Egyptian culture was like at various times
throughout its long and storied past. The further away historians get
from the Ptolemaic period in age and geography, the amount of
documentable history quickly wanes and we’re left making many
assumptions. The more assumptions within any historical model, the more
loopholes for radical interpretations of history exist, and the Book of
Abraham nestles comfortably in a number of those loopholes.

In these clips, Muhlstein makes the argument that the Book of Abraham on
the Chandler papyri was a manuscript of Abraham’s writing and that the
heading where it says ‘written by his own hand,’ is merely an artifact
from the copies of copies of copies that were passed down for it to
finally make it into the Chandler papyri. The problem with this argument
is that no copies of the Book of Abraham on papyri or any other medium
exist prior to 1842 when it was published by Joseph Smith in the Times
and Seasons in Nauvoo. Copies of copies of copies passed down for 1800
years from a person where no extant contemporary proof exists of his
existence, let alone of his writings, and all of those have been lost to
historical antiquity and only one copy survived in the Chandler papyri.
That is an extremely bold assertion and it’s not made without evidence,
but rather counter to all other historical evidence, rendering the
argument completely and offensively absurd.

Here’s the two clips and we’ll talk about them after.

Text vs. Manuscript

Anachronisms

We already talked about the first clip before playing them, but the
second clip bears quick mention. Anachronisms are fatal flaws to
historical documents. If a text claims the Romans conquered the near and
middle east with phaser guns or that Israelites came over to America in
wooden submarines, it kinda destroys the credibility that the text is a
contemporary source for those events. Needless to say, the Book of
Abraham is full of anachronisms, not least of which is the 1800 year
time span from when the biblical Abraham supposedly lived to when the
Chandler Papyri were created.

The next clip deals with Jo and W.W. Phelps making their translation of
the Egyptian alphabet and grammar which we briefly discussed earlier.

Egyptian grammar and translation method

Ooh Ooh, I have a theory\! Jo made it up\! Egyptomaina was in full-swing
when he acquired the papyri and he’d claimed to have translated Egyptian
before with the Book of Mormon, so why not translate some real Egyptian
papyri. Plus, as Muhlstein stated, Champollion’s work hadn’t made the
impact in American culture it had in Europe by this time and I’d be
willing to bet that Jo was trying to jump the shark. With the thousands
of European immigrants coming over thanks to Bloody Brigham Young’s
emigration fund, people were probably talking a lot more about Egyptian
stuff than they had before and Jo probably wanted to get his translation
out as soon as possible to be yet one more of the competing alphabet and
grammar lexicons on the market. So, he took the genesis narrative,
peppered in a few romanticized details of Abraham’s life and times,
lifting EVERYTHING from his favorite book, the Bible, and manufactured
everything else to fit. That theory accounts for all the evidence
including him and W.W. Phelps abandoning the task at the end of 1835
when they both must have realized that they didn’t know anything about
Egyptology. Jo trying to make money off a current event makes a lot more
sense than any convoluted mess of a theory apologists have constructed
over the years to allow Jo to be a true prophet of God even though he
got the entire translation wrong.

One wonders, if Jo had performed a perfect translation, wouldn’t all
Egyptologists convert to the Church? Wouldn’t every member who studies
the Book of Abraham have their testimony reinforced without fail? I
can’t count the number of times I’ve been told by somebody that when
they learned about the Book of Abraham they were done with Joseph Smith
and the Church because it so brazenly and unequivocally proves Jo to be
a false prophet. But, if the inverse were true and the translation is
accurate, that should cause every member who studies the Book of Abraham
and every non-Member Egyptologist who studies it to think Jo was a
prophet, right?

Try to pick out all the wishy-washy language being used to deal with
this issue…

Why not all Egyptologists Mormon

I’ll let that clip stand on its own merit. I think his biases and vested
interests, both religious and monetary, are abundantly clear by this
point, which he makes abundantly clear in this next clip.

Satisfy both sides

He’s held to a high standard by both sides of the issue. His
Egyptologist colleagues will heavily scrutinize his work because they
know his biases, and members of the Church will scrutinize his work if
he isn’t apologetic enough. What a tenuous knife-edge to balance his
scholarship. Do you think his balancing of these sides of the issue
might color his conclusions and work to a noticeable degree? If he
wasn’t a member of the Church, would he come to the conclusions his
entire life’s work seems to be centered around? It’s merely his career,
the respect of his Mormon and non-Mormon historian colleagues, his
family and non-colleague friends, his life’s work and all the books and
articles he’s written, and his entire eternal happiness at stake should
he come to the Book of Abraham with the skepticism it deserves and
renounces it as scripture. I don’t envy Muhlstein, Ricks, Gee, or
anybody else who’ve built their livelihood around Book of Abraham
apologetics, but I also don’t pity them. It’s just important to point
out that Mormon Egyptologists have a lot riding on continuing to toe the
party line when it comes to Mormon scripture.

The article we were reading through earlier by John Gee and Stephen
Ricks has a similar section to what Muhlstein said in that last clip
with a tiny section comprised of one paragraph called ‘What Is at
Stake?’

“What is at stake if the Book of Abraham is jettisoned as unhistorical?
Most Latter-day Saints do not turn to the Book of Abraham for
astronomical information, nor do they generally quote the facsimiles in
sacrament meeting talks. Rather, they turn to the Book of Abraham
because it contains the clearest statement on the preexistence
(3:21–28), the most concise statement of the purpose of life
(3:25), [\[172\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn172) and
the most comprehensive and succinct version of the Abrahamic covenant
(2:
ll). [\[173\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn173) Furthermore,
Abraham’s stirring quest (1:2) is scarcely matched
anywhere. [\[174\]](https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/historicity-and-latter-day-saint-scriptures/3-historical-plausibility-historicity-book#_edn174) These
are truly pearls of great price that Latter-day Saints are loath to
trade for the mess of pottage that the critics offer them in exchange.
What motivated the pioneers to undertake all that labor and to face all
those hazards was not dim hope or wishful thinking about legends but a
burning witness about what was really, historically true, a testimony of
the canon of scriptures of the Latter-day Saints and the Prophet who
revealed them.”

Don’t let the facts critics present get in the way of a good story, the
pioneers sure didn’t and they’re up in the Celestial kingdom now. This
paragraph seems to tip the hand of Gee and Ricks which they’ve been
keeping close to their bosom since the beginning of the article. What
other academic article includes a paragraph that says if you don’t
believe in the subject matter, the cruel harsh world of academia offers
you no solace?

One final clip from Muhlstein which drives this point home and really
couches the entire issue of the field of study and apologetics
surrounding the Book of Abraham in a single succinct 1:12 clip.

Gospel has answers

It’s not that you don’t have a perfect answer to everything, it’s that
you offer answers and they’re WRONG\! Those little tidbits he mentioned
of Jershon and Olishem are mere cherry-picking of evidence, but that’s
not how historical models are constructed. The entire field of Book of
Abraham apologetics is built on a lie by Joseph Smith and the lengths
needed to achieve some kind of cohesive view of the Book of Abraham to
merely put it at the level of ‘historical plausibility’ are asinine and
riddled with logical fallacies. Intellectual dishonesty can take many
forms and this is the level of apologetics we’re dealing with when it
comes to the Book of Abraham. Dishonesty, half-truths, overstating
evidence, ignoring the preponderance of evidence to the contrary, all of
this to satisfy a religious claim made by Joseph Smith, the prophet of
God, the prophet of the last dispensation.

If all the books and the entire field of Book of Abraham apologetics
relies on similar dishonesty and logical fallacies as this article and
series of audio clips do, it’s no wonder Muhlstein feels attacked by
Egyptologists who write critically about the subject. Academia isn’t
anti-religion, it’s anti-falsehoods. When a religion calls patently
absurd falsehoods it’s scripture, then academia is, by transitive
property, anti-religion. Academia and science doesn’t exist to disprove
religion, it exists to prove the world around us and that’s only a
problem when religions claim falsehoods as truth. It’s not scientists
and historians who are opposed to your religion, it’s your religion
that’s opposed to facts that scientists and historians use to
understand the world.

One point which has utterly escaped me in studying all of this field of
apologetics is that the vast VAST majority of Mormons are never in
contact with any of this information. The field of apologetics
surrounding the Book of Abraham is made by extremely smart religious
people, for extremely smart religious people who truly want to know
about their religion. Sure, this field may cause some average,
chapel-attending Mormons to put their concerns aside, but this doesn’t
convince any skeptical Egyptologists. These arguments aren’t made to
convert people to Mormonism, they’re made to keep people from jumping
out of the sinking ship.

When Mormons hear about the Book of Abraham, it’s rarely in the capacity
of skeptical criticisms and apologetic answers. Most contact the average
chapel Mormon has with the Book of Abraham is reading a few verses out
of it when hearing a lesson on the Plan of Salvation, and then that’s
it. Their exposure is done and over with. They go home from church, eat
dinner, and get up and go to work on Monday never thinking about the
Book of Abraham with any level of skeptical scrutiny.

When this average chapel Mormon hears something critical about the Book
of Abraham, their first stop won’t be byu.edu or
bookofabrahamchallenges.org, it’ll the search bar at lds.org. That’s
what we’ll go through, line upon line, precept upon precept next
episode. We have an arsenal of arguments to point out the problems in
the Book of Abraham, let’s pick up next week with ways to properly deal
with that average Mormon who hears about these problems, reads the
Translation and the Historicity of the Book of Abraham gospel topics
essay on lds.org, and comes back living inside the tiny little carved
out cognitive loophole of historical plausibility in which faith in the
Book of Abraham must reside.

If you’ll hang in there for a few more minutes for a concluding thought…

The Book of Abraham doesn’t fall into the realm of Ancient Egyptology,
it’s a creation of 19<sup>th</sup>-century American religious history.
These video clips and the BYU article and all of the books and articles
written by John Gee, Kerry Muhlstein, Hugh Nibley, Mike Rhodes, or any
other Mormon Egyptologist or historians assume the Book of Abraham is
what it claims to be and studies it through the lens of 12<sup>th</sup>
or 13<sup>th</sup> dynasty Egyptian history, but no respectable
Egyptologist believes the Chandler papyri have anything to do with the
Book of Abraham. Yes, I assert that any Egyptologist who defends the
Book of Abraham as what Joseph Smith claimed it to be as not worthy of
respect. Sure, their other work in the field of Egyptology may be
respectable, but if any of these Egyptologists are willing to cast aside
the entire field of Egyptology for the sake of believing that the Book
of Abraham came from the actual Abraham and was ‘translated’ by Joseph
Smith, they are worthy of absolutely no respect for that level of
intellectual dishonesty.

In order for that assertion to be justified, let’s draw those lines of
distinction we began the show with. We have the supposed Abraham who
lived somewhere around 2000 B.C.E. and left behind no writings with no
contemporary evidence for his existence. Even Genesis, from which
Abraham’s story is known, was only written down around 700 B.C.E.,
passed down from oral traditions. If Abraham was a real historical
person, you think some details may have been lost in that 1300 year
timespan where we have absolutely no writings about him whatsoever? Then
we have Ptolemaic Egypt spanning about 300 B.C.E. to around 30 B.C.E.,
during which the Chandler papyri were created with little or no Hebrew
influence, much less contain anything about Hebrew prophets whose
existence is already a matter of conjecture. After that we move ahead
another 1800 years, and to the other side of the Earth, and we have
Joseph Smith come along publishing the Book of Abraham in 1842. When we
examine these massively disparate points of human history, culture,
religion, and events, and further attempt to connect threads among all
those points spanning 4000 years of written history, EVERYTHING breaks
down. We’re left with cherry-picking data, making broad
overgeneralizations, moving the goalposts, sharpshooting conclusions
based on overstated evidence, granting historical plausibility to
completely absurd assertions, and more importantly, we’re forced to
ignore the mountains of evidence staring us in the face which
unequivocally prove Joseph Smith’s assertions to be false.

To complicate matters even further, the Brighamite Church has been
defending the Book of Abraham as scripture since 1880 when it was
canonized as a constituent book within the Pearl of Great Price. Since
the rediscovery of the Papyrus collection in the Metropolitan museum in
New York in 1966, Mormon apologists have spent countless mental and
monetary resources defending the veracity of the Book of Abraham for
what it purports, and Joseph Smith claimed it, to be. This is a vicious
sunk-cost fallacy feedback loop making it seem like the LDS Church is
essentially unable to abandon the Book of Abraham as scripture. What
kind of face would the Church lose if they leadership came out tomorrow
and decanonized the Book of Abraham because of problems with its
historicity? Would it not logically follow that such a move would open
up more Mormon scripture to being disavowed or removed due to similar
historic inaccuracies? Once you say the Book of Abraham isn’t scripture
because it’s not factual, how does that not open up the Book of Mormon,
as well as every resultant teaching and doctrine following it, to the
same vulnerability? Where might that lead?

Look, the Book of Abraham exists, it was a creation of Joseph Smith in
1842. The Chandler papyri existed and fragments of the collection still
exist today, and that was all made around the 1<sup>st</sup> or second
century B.C.E. as the funerary rights for a high-ranking individual in
Egyptian society. Abraham may have existed, but any evidence of his life
comes only from the Bible which is rife with historical inaccuracies
already and shouldn’t be granted any greater level of historical
credibility than any other religious texts from the same time periods
which books of the Bible were written during. All of those facts exist
separate and distinct from each other and any effort to reconcile those
is an exercise in futility at best and unabashed lying to prove a
narrative with no connection to reality at worst, all because of
religion and the scripture it clings to. There are no respectable
historians or Egyptologists who think the Book of Abraham is anything
other than a creation of Joseph Smith.

Rob Ritner said it succinctly in The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: A
Complete Edition when referring to Facsimile 1 and the related text of
the Book of Abraham. I’ll let Ritner put the cherry on top for today:

“Since 1861, professional Egyptologists have been justifiably dismissive
of Smith’s uninformed explanations, and now Even the FARMS-sponsored
publication by Rhodes (2002) has failed to defend or even cite them.

Here, at least, there is agreement that the Smith explanations are
untenable, and as the images are *directly cited* in the narrative
itself, the underlying text of the Book of Abraham has been found and
Smith’s interpretation disproved. There can be no question of any “lost”
section of the papyrus that contained an ancient text composed by
Abraham, since the author of the *supposedly pre-existent* Book of
Abraham both claims and depicts the *Ptolemaic* vignette as his own
additions (Facsimile 1) to the tale. Abraham cannot have lived as late
as the Ptolemaic era, the papyrus illustration of Hor cannot be dated
earlier than the Ptolemaic era, and no *rational* defense of the
narrative is possible. Except for those willfully blind, the case is
closed. As an episode in American religious history and early
“Egyptomania,” the text is still of interest; no investigator seeking
ancient evidence should waste \[their\] time.”

A2B

Outro
