---
layout: post
title: Ep 110 - King Me!
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-110-king/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-110-king-me
category: History
date: 2018-07-06 06:08:58 +0000
---

Hear the words of my mouth

Ep 110 -- King Me!

On this episode, Joseph Smith introduces the endowment ceremony and
forms the Quorum of the Anointed, or the Holy Order. Jo had been
practicing esoteric rites from his earliest days in Kirtland, but this
was the codification of the ceremony which would come to be practiced in
every Mormon temple after Smith's death. We read through one of the
earliest available exposes created to reveal the terrifying theocratic
rituals embodied by Jo and the elite Mormons who went through this
occult initiation.

Links:

Anointed Quorum in Nauvoo by Devery Anderson\
<https://archive.org/stream/AnointedQuorum/Anointed%20Quorum_djvu.txt>

Evolution of Endowment Ceremony\
<http://www.ldsendowment.org/timeline.html>

Duncan's Royal Arch Masonic ritual expose\
<http://www.sacred-texts.com/mas/dun/dun08.htm>

Warsaw Signal Apr 1846\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1846.htm#021846>

LDS Temple Ceremony by Edward Ashment\
<https://dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V27N03_303.pdf>

A Dialogue between Adam and Eve by Increase and Maria Van Dusen\
<https://archive.org/stream/dialoguebetweena00vand#page/4/mode/2up>

Upcoming announcements:

Seattle Atheists presentation\
<https://www.meetup.com/seattle-atheists/events/252222177/>

Squatters Live Show\
<https://www.facebook.com/events/262564631179384/>

Sunstone Symposium SLC 2018\
<https://www.sunstonemagazine.com/2018-salt-lake-summer-symposium/>

CHECK OUT THE NEW SHOW!!!\
<http://www.glassboxpodcast.com/index.html>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Life in Nauvoo was busy as ever while Pistol Packin' Porter Rockwell was
off fulfilling prophecy with a stolen pistol in Missouri. 2 days before
Port's bullets struck Ex-Governor and Senatorial candidate Lilburn
Boggs, on May 4^th^, 1842, Joseph Smith altered the trajectory of
Mormonism forever.

According to Heber C. Kimball, Joseph recognized that "masonry was taken
from presthood but has become degenerated." Jo had ascended to the
sublime degree of Masonry in the newly dedicated Nauvoo Masonic Lodge in
mid-march, now 7 weeks later, he coopted the procedure to make his own
ascendancy ritual, complete with Mormon proprietary drama.

Those familiar with the Masonic passion narrative, Joseph's passion
narrative was similarly based in the bible. Whereas Masonic passion
narratives, dependent on rite of course, usually act out the creation of
Solomon's temple and the death of beloved brother Hiram Abiff, Joseph
went much earlier than the temple of Solomon. Like way earlier, like to
the creation narrative. Jo always had his own version of creation and
Christian theology constantly adapting and developing in his mind and he
was a propaganda machine. Jo himself had produced plenty of proprietary
scripture to create his own passion narrative, loosely based on the
Masonic narrative.

So, on 4 May 1842, Jo as the Highest of Priests and Master of
Ceremonies, along with his brother Hyrum, likely as the Senior Grand
Warden or some other similarly named position, gathered 9 fellow master
Masons; James Adams, Heber the Creeper Kimball, William Law, William
Marks, George Miller, White-out Willard Richards, Father Newel K.
Whitney, and Bloody Brigham Young and performed the first temple passion
narrative. This narrative would adapt and grow for the two remaining
years of Jo's life, eventually be performed by Brigham Young in the
newly dedicated Nauvoo Temple beginning at the end of 1845, and continue
a system of adaptation and development until Bloody Brigham's death in
1877. 1877 was the first year that the endowments were performed for the
dead. It continues to develop and evolve to this day, which we'll get
into.

These 9 men Jo and Hyrum initiated in the first week of May 1842 would
come to be known as The Anointed Quorum, the Holy Order, or the Holy
Order of the Anointed. This quorum was the most secretive and esoteric
group Jo had ever created in his entire ministry. For the purposes of
understanding the Quorum of the Anointed and the ritual they practiced,
it's necessary to forget anything you know about the Modern temple
rituals in Mormonism. If you've watched Mike Norton's surreptitious
temple ritual videos on the NewNameNoah YouTube channel, those are
merely the most recent adaptation of the passion narrative which takes
place in Mormon temples. Those videos are different in many ways from
what Jo and Hyrum introduced in May of 1842 when they created the Quorum
of the Anointed.

A major issue when talking about the Anointed Quorum is that so little
survives of what took place in the historical record. A few historians
have been able to painstakingly reconstruct Joseph's passion narrative
in vague terms through the few surviving accounts that could be counted
on one hand.

Glen M. Leonard, an historian with the Neal A. Maxwell Institute of
Religious Studies at BYU said this of the original Anointed Quorum
ritual in his book, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, A People of Promise circa
2002:

"\[The rituals\] set forth a pattern or figurative model for life. The
teachings began with a recital of the creation of the earth and its
preparation to host life. The story carried the familiar ring of the
Genesis account, echoed as well in Joseph Smith's revealed book of Moses
and book of Abraham. The disobedience and expulsion of Adam and Eve from
the Garden of Eden set the stage for an explanation of Christ's
atonement for that original transgression and for the sins of the entire
human family. Also included was a recital of mankind's tendency to stray
from the truth through apostasy and the need for apostolic authority to
administer authoritative ordinances and teach true gospel principles.
Participants were reminded that in addition to the Savior's redemptive
gift they must be obedient to God's commandments to obtain a celestial
glory. Within the context of these gospel instructions, the initiates
made covenants of personal virtue and benevolence and of commitment to
the church. They agreed to devote their talents and means to spread the
gospel, to strengthen the church, and to prepare the earth for the
return of Jesus Christ."

As we'll see very soon, Leonard's characterization of the anointed
quorum ritual sounds pleasant and biblical. However, once we get into
the exposes we'll be reading today, it becomes clear that Mormonism was
a death cult that required the utmost fealty when passing through this
anointing rite.

Where various iterations of Masonry practice a fairly standardized
passion narrative which may be adapted to different rites and
localities, Jo and Hyrum created their own passion narrative based on
Jo's revealed scriptures. We don't know exactly what this looked like,
however. We know some version of it came to be practiced in the Nauvoo
Temple of which there are 3 noted exposes which were published after
1846 so those are the earliest iterations of the endowment ceremony
historians can use to attempt some kind of reconstruction of the ritual
as it was practiced at some point. We'll be reading through 2 of those
today. However, as with any new patternistic ritual, when Jo and his
Sidekick Abiff Hyrum Smith introduced the endowment ritual, it likely
rapidly developed and adapted during the first few attempts. The process
was eventually streamlined and women were inducted into the Quorum of
the Anointed beginning with Emma Smith in Autumn of 1843.

It's worth noting that this didn't just happen. It wasn't May 3, 1842
and there was no esoteric rites practiced in Mormonism, then suddenly on
May 4^th^ Jo has an entire washing and anointing ceremony complete with
passion narrative of Adam and Eve worked out in his mind, he'd been
practicing these rituals since the beginning of the Church in Kirtland,
Ohio. Famously the School of the Prophets, first hosted in the upper
floor of the Johnson home then in the meeting room in the Newel K.
Whitney store, included a washing ceremony where the men would all bathe
and cover their entire bodies in whiskey infused with cinnamon. What
followed were frequently visions of angels and very strange spiritual
manifestations. It's worth noting that cinnamon, in high dosages, is
psychoactive, but you have to eat a TON of it to get the psychoactive
effects. However, your skin is a really large organ and topical
chemicals make their way into your bloodstream through your skin. Also,
the whiskey cinnamon mix evaporating off a person's skins would have an
interesting effect like menthol or lidocaine, only warming instead of
cooling. After the whiskey bath, the men would then anoint each other on
the head with "consecrated" anointing oil, and the term consecrated as
it was used in early Mormonism meant more than just saying a prayer over
it. The Smith-entheogen theory would posit the anointing oil was a
vehicle for a psychoactive substance the way it was used in witching
ointments like datura or mandrake from the nightshade family. It
shouldn't be a mystery as to how the brethren in the school of the
prophets were able to see the face of god with their spiritual eyes, but
I would posit that it wasn't actually the power of God. Some psychonauts
out there may disagree with me on that point. God apparently lives in
psychedelic plants.

Fast forward to the upper floor of the printing office in Kirtland with
the School of the Elders and similar ritualism was practiced nearly
weekly by the elites of the Church until the Kirtland Temple was
completed in early 1836 when they moved their parties to the 3^rd^ floor
of the massive new monolith adorning the hill overlooking Chillicothe
ravine. The Kirtland temple was used for just over a year before
"persecution" (in air quotes) became too much for Jo to handle and he
was chased out of town and moved to the congregation in Missouri.

Esoteric rituals took on a new form in Missouri out of desperation to
make the Mormons a force to contend with. The Danites, previously known
as the Daughters of Zion and the Brother of Gideon society before that,
were the most trusted Mormons who would swear their lives to Mormonism.
Similarly, initiation into the Danite society required a washing and
anointing and included an oath of undying fealty to the prophet and
spreading the gospel. Also, a death threat was invoked should any person
reveal the secrets of the society, which was fitting as it was used for
extra military affairs in Missouri during the 1838 conflict.

During each of these iterations, Jo adapted and evolved the Mormon
higher degree initiation rite. Now, in May of 1842, he had ascended to
Master Mason and the Mormon ceremony wildly evolved to become much more
similar to what has been practiced in the temple ever since. But, keep
in mind that the ceremony Jo introduced is not what is in the great and
spacious buildings today. The Mormon temple ceremony has undergone no
less than 17 major periods of change as Mormon history has progressed
through the remainder of the 19^th^ and 20^th^ centuries. We'll discuss
that evolution after we read through our exposes today to discuss
exactly how it's changed.

One thing worth mentioning as well, this washing and anointing Jo
introduced as the endowment in May 1842 is not the second anointing
ritual. The second anointing wouldn't be introduced for another year.
The second anointing is referred to in technical terms as the Calling
and Election sure ritual.

Bruce R. McKonkie defined it as this in Mormon Doctrine 1^st^ ed. circa
1958:

"Those members of the Church who devote themselves wholly to
righteousness, living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth
of God, make their *calling and election sure*. That is, they receive
the more sure word of prophecy, which means that the Lord seals their
exaltation upon them while they are yet in this life. Peter summarized
the course of righteousness which the saints must pursue to make their
calling and election sure and then (referring to his experience on the
Mount of Transfiguration with James and John) said that those three had
received this more sure word of prophecy....

JS: "When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is
determined to serve him at all hazards, then the man will find his
calling and election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive
the other Comforter." To receive the other Comforter is to have Christ
appear to him and to see the visions of eternity."

McKonkie concludes with this:

"It should be clearly understood that these high blessings are not part
of celestial marriage. "Blessings pronounced upon couples in connection
with celestial marriage are conditioned upon the subsequent faithfulness
of the participating parties.""

The second anointing rite would come along in 1843 and that's the
ceremony where the initiates are blessed with exaltation while still in
this mortal coil, which is separate from the endowment ritual we're
discussing today. Those with the second anointing will go to the highest
level of the celestial kingdom and get their own planet unless they shed
innocent blood, that's the only disqualifier. Killing an innocent person
the only thing which would bar them from the celestial kingdom, and
luckily the Church leadership designates who is and is not innocent.

However, the second anointing ritual did evolve from what was practiced
when this endowment ritual introduced in May 1842. A sharp divide exists
in the realm of Mormon historians as to how much influence Masonic
rituals had on the endowment ceremony Jo introduced. D. Michael Quinn
articulates the conflict well in Early Mormonism and the Magic Word
View, 2^nd^ ed pg 230

"A scholar of Christian Gnosticism added that 'in order to reach the
highest heaven the spirit must pass through the lower heavens' governed
by 'rulers' to whom the departed spirit must give 'magical passwords'.

None of the emphasis on the magic ascent bore any similarity to Masonic
teachings. However, the purpose of the occult mysteries in the ancient
world paralleled Brigham Young's explanation of the modern endowment's
purpose: 'passing the angels who stand as sentinels being enabled to
give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy
Priesthood.'

In fact, Hugh Nibley and other LDS scholars have consistently turned to
the occult rites of ancient Egyptian and Gnostic mystery religions to
demonstrate by parallel evidence the antiquity of Mormon endowment
rituals. As William J. Hamblin has noted: 'Much of Nibley's other work
\[before 1989\] also abounds with references to early Gnosticism, which
has important links to the hermetic and alchemical traditions of late
antiquity.' Hamblin and fellow FARMS polemicists Peterson and Mitton
have added that 'there is a large body of work which indicates that the
closest analogues \[of the LDS endowment\] are to the rituals and
esoteric doctrines of early Christianity and Judaism in the eastern
Mediterranean in the first two or three centuries before and after
Christ.' In making such comparisons, Hamblin has acknowledged that
'there are many elements in Jewish ascension mysticism that we today
would find very strange, including various magical incantations and
practices and a strong emphasis on gematria. Gematria is a complex
system of mystical interpretations of numbers, letters, and words.' By
drawing only on authorized descriptions of the endowment by LDS leaders,
it is possible to see how the Mormon endowment reflected the ancient and
occult mysteries far closer than Freemasonry."

It's crucial to Mormon claims of Joseph's divinity that he didn't coopt
the Masonic ritual for the endowment ceremony. Should that be the case,
it may prove that Joseph Smith was a synthesizer instead of a prophet.
It's absolutely necessary to prove for Mormons that Jo's endowment
ceremony introduced in May 1842 was a restoration of the original
ancient mysteries. Anything otherwise makes Jo seem like a serial
plagiarist. We can examine the timeline for some possible answers. Jo
ascended to Master Mason in March of 1842, and in May of 1842 he created
the endowment ceremony which looks like Masonic rites. We shouldn't get
lost in positing causation and rely on Post Hoc ergo propter hoc logic
to do it, but the similarities are far too brazen for Masonry not to
have influenced Jo's mind.

Apologists and Mormon historians often claim Jo restored the original
ancient Christian mysteries as Quinn posited in the previous reading,
thus concluding that Freemasonry merely evolved in parallel with Jo's
endowment ceremony. Had Jo created the endowment without ever being
exposed to Masonry and none of his friends and family members being
Masons, this argument may hold water. However, he was surrounded by
Masons and had himself just become a Mason when the endowment ceremony
came along. Sure, the similarities may be superficial, but nobody can
claim Masonry didn't influence the endowment ceremony unless doing so
with ulterior motives.

But a question still remains. If Jo restored the original ancient
mysteries which were lost since the death of Jesus, what exactly does
the rite look like? Also, the endowment rite has been adapted so many
times even during Jo's lifetime and it's undergone many adaptations
after his death, so when did this endowment ceremony hit its perfect
form? Did Jo restore the perfect form of the endowment ceremony, or have
the changes made since his death made the ceremony more perfect, or even
less perfect? What are the true ancient rites of Christianity to be
restored to the earth through modern-day prophets?

What I mean by that is the average member of the church today
understands that Mormonism is the restored gospel of Jesus Christ and
what they practice today is what Jo restored. The dark ages lost the one
true gospel of Jesus, so Jo was there to pick the world up out of its
ignorance by restoring the original gospel. But we know there was a
constant evolution of Jo's theology as he progressed through his
ministry. It wasn't April of 1830 at the organization of the Church and
instantly everything that Mormons do today was brought to life.
Endowment ceremony, sacrament practices, different priesthoods, baptisms
for the dead, missionaries in two by twos, polygamy, all of it is rarely
ever questioned as to when and how each practice came about. I've
documented extensively the evolution of each of these aspects of
Mormonism in this show and the events leading up to their genesis to
illustrate that Jo's theology was constantly adapting and changing, much
like the endowment ceremony itself.

With that in mind, let's talk about the earliest version of the
endowment ceremony historians have access to from an outside source. The
earlier quote from Glen Leonard was far too vague to understand any of
the details or recreate the ceremony. Instead we'll be relying on two
exposes. The first was published by Maria and Increase McGee Van Dusen
who went through the endowment in 1846 and published their expose early
the next year. The second expose is from an unknown author who went
under the pen-name Emeline. It's worth noting before we get started that
this is the endowment ceremony after it had been practiced for 4 years
and had likely undergone a number of adaptations to become what we're
about to get in to. Unfortunately for historians, this is about the best
they can do as far as understanding the exact proceedings of the
earliest endowment ceremony. Records of the most original ceremony
created in May of 1842 may exist, but they're not available to
historians as secrecy was, and still is, of the utmost importance.

Increase Mcgee and Maria Van Dusen's 1847 expose of the Mormon endowment
ceremony divides the rite into 7 separate degrees. They'd both converted
to Mormonism in 1842 and began laboring on the temple as soon as they
got in town along with thousands of other Mormons from when the
cornerstone was laid in April of 1840 to the dedication in late 1845.
This initial expose was titled *A Dialogue Between Adam and Eve*, but
the book went through no less that 7 printings all the way into the late
1850s with new titles each time. The 1849 edition was titled Startling
Disclosures of the Mormon Conspiracy, and it elaborates significantly on
the 1847 edition, likely to sell more copies. Subsequent editions become
more epic and salacious which is exactly why historians prefer the
original 1847 edition over later editions, it's the most authentic and
what we'll be reading from today.

We'll get to that momentarily, but before we do I wanted to give
everybody a couple reminders for events we have coming up very soon.

Seattle Atheists July 14th

LIVE SHOW Benefit to local LGBTQIA group in UTAH

Ryan and Ethan

Sunstone July 28^th^ 10:15

On the day of their initiation, the Van Dusens were told to bring with
them white pants for Increase and a night gown for Maria and arrive at
the temple at 5 in the morning. After that, the endowment ceremony
unfolds. I've adapted some of the language to make it more listenable.

"First Degree in the Temple

We go according to orders at five precisely, for we are anxious to
receive our long expected blessing from God, for which we have labored
faithfully, and for the knowledge of which we have been held in
suspense, with thousands of others, for years, especially for the last
number of weeks, while others have been going in their turn before us.
We are met at the outside porch of the Temple and ordered to pass up the
main winding stairway, from the base to the upper attic story; here is a
sitting room; we are ordered to be seated, where we lay off the hat,
cloak, bonnet, &c.; our anxiety now begins moderately to increase, by
some curious and strange movements we see here, such as carrying water
to and from a certain direction, &c. A few of such and other similar
strange movements are here accidentally crossing our observation, as we
sit here on this singular occasion, conducted to begin with, where we
did not expect to go, that is, in the attic story of the Temple. We are
now called out of the sitting room and placed in front of a closed door,
that opens on a floor the whole size of the Temple. I am ordered now to
take my wife and pass through this door, which opens as we approach it.
We are brought immediately into a narrow hall formed by the canvass I
spoke of; at the farther end of the hall stands a man; as we approach
him, he says, you must here separate; directs me through a door to the
right, my wife through one to the left, in an opposite direction. I am
now ordered to be seated; I next pass through an examination to this
effect; ~~whether I am~~ \[are you\] sufficiently responsible to receive
what ~~they~~ \[we\] are about to commit to ~~me~~\[you?\], &c. If I am
known to be so, I am initiated through; if not, I go no further. After
undergoing an examination of this kind, I am ordered by the conductor
~~to~~ lay off ~~my~~ \[your\] outside clothes, such as coat, vest,
pants, boots, &c., and lay them on a pile in the centre of the floor.
After some more ceremony of not much consequence,

Second degree in the Temple

I am conducted through a door into another room, this room is
considerably shaded nearly to twilight. There is a variety of ceremony
going on in this room, some of rather to\[o\] delicate a nature to speak
of as this work is designed to be read by all classes of both sex. I am
however divested of the remainder of my clothing, and placed \[nude\] in
a horizontal position in a bath of water that has been prepared for this
purpose, and am washed from head to foot, with the following ceremony:
"I wash you that you may be clean to perform the work assigned to you;
your eyes, that you may see the glory of God; your ears, that you may
hear His voice; your mouth, that you may speak forth His praise; your
arms and breast, that you may be strong to perform His work; and so down
to your feet, that you may be swift to run the race," &c. All this time
I am rolled and tumbled about from one side of the bath to the other.
Head a part of the time under water, half strangled under a considerable
excitement, not knowing what was coming next. At last the priest lays
his hands on my head, and pronounces ~~me~~ \[you are\] clean in the
name of the Lord, and prepared for the further ordinances of his house.

I am now ordered out of the bath in a standing position, and have sweet
scented oil poured from a horn on the top of my head, until it runs all
over my body. ~~I am now said to be~~ \[you are now\] the Lord's
Annointed, as in the days of old, when they were annointed to the office
of King, &c. After this I am seated, and the priest lays his hands on my
head and ordains me to be king in time and eternity. After receiving
this ordination I am presented with, and have put on, what they call an
under garment. This is a tight fit, made of white cotton cloth, with two
marks on it; a square in the breast, and a compass on the knee. I am
told this garment represents the white stone in scripture which was a
new name given, I here have a new name given me. ~~I am told also, that
I am~~ \[you are\] always to wear this garment under ~~my~~ \[your\]
clothes, while ~~I am~~ \[you are\] in the world. God has ordered this;
and ~~I~~ \[you\] can receive no harm while ~~I~~ \[you\] have it on.
The name I received was Lehi, one of the names in the Book of Mormon.
This name I was forbidden to reveal to any one but the one at the door
of the Celestial Kingdom. What this meant, I found out afterwards. The
compass on the knee signifies our willingness to bow always; the square,
God's protection, &c. I now have put on me, over this under garment, a
common shirt open at the collar. In this dress, after so much ceremony,
I am conducted into a third room, where a lesson commences. It will
readily be perceived by the intelligent reader, that this whole ceremony
is designed to represent a certain thing, and what has been acted in the
two rooms already described, consists altogether in a preparation of
what follows, probaly designed to represent some of the ancient customs
where the children of Israel were required to wash their clothes &c. to
appear in the presence of the Lord.

Third degree in the Temple

I am now placed in a certain position on the floor designed to represent
a certain thing, and that is Adam in embryo. All is now silent for
awhile, the silence is at lenght broken by a rumbling noise, as from a
distance, the noise terminates in a voice: "Let the light be divided
from the darkness; let the light be called day, and the darkness night:
Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters; Let the firmament
be called Heaven; let the waters under the firmament be gathered
together in one place, and let the dry land appear; let the dry land be
called earth; and the gathering together of the waters, seas; let the
earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree
yielding fruit, after his kind, whose seed is in itselt upon the earth;
let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and
creeping things and beasts of the earth, after their kind."

\[The reader will perceive that this conversation differs from Moses'
history of the creation. Moses says, "And the Lord sayed let there be
light &c." and there was light, speaking of the Deity in the third
person. It is here as if the Almighty himself is first in the act of
creation; and this is the idea intended in the farce.\]

After the individual thus representing the Lord behind the curtain (as
in the act of creation,) is supposed to have created the heavens and the
earth, cattle, beasts, creeping things, fowls of the air, fish of the
sea, &c., he continues his work farther and says, "Now let us go down
and make man in our image, after our likeness." All this time I am in
silence, hearing, but not seeing any thing, and knowing not what is to
take place the next moment; for all is new and unexpected from first to
last, of this whole drama. When he says, "Let us go down and make man,"
I hear his footsteps approaching the room where I am; he comes
in---comes to where I am---puts his hand to the floor, and then on me,
as if fulfilling this scripture: "And the Lord God formed man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and man became a living soul." After going on as if forming me newly of
the dust of the ground, he stoops down and breathes on me, and now I am
supposed to first spring into life. I am next ordered to change my
position to a sleeping one, as if fulfilling, "And the Lord God caused a
deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept." I am now ordered to put my
head down low and feign myself in a deep sleep. The individual
representing the Almighty, continues his work, as if fulfilling, "And he
took a rib, and the rib which the Lord God had taken from man made he a
woman, and brought her unto the man." After he has taken the rib, he
passes out of the room and is supposed to have formed the woman of the
rib; he soon returns with a woman and places her directly before me, as
I am sitting, head down, as if in a deep sleep. I am now saluted with a
loud voice, "Adam, here is thy companion. I give her to be with
thee---what wilt thou call her?" I now raise up my head and awake out of
my feigned sleep, and to my surprise, here stands a female directly in
front of me, about 3.5 feet from my knees, as I am seated; her dress
consists of an under piece of linen, white stockings, long night gown
all tied down before, and a kind of white head dress of book muslin,
looking me directly in the face, without a smile. As I raise up my head
from the voice, "Adam, here is thy companion---what wilt thou call her?"
I now answer by direction, "This is bone of my bone and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man."
After a second squint at this supposed new made Eve, I found her to be
my wife that I had separated from me on first entering the Temple. This
was the first time I had seen her, or even thought of her, from the
commencement of this very queer and excitable farce, my mind being
altogether taken up with the novelty of this unexpected ceremony.---She
tells me after leaving me where we were ordered to part, on first
entering, she has gone through two rooms, and the same ceremony
precisely, only conducted by females exclusively. We are now supposed to
be Adam and Eve, and the reason is to represent nature. I am now ordered
to take Eve and follow our conductor out through a partition door into
another apartment.

Fourth Degree in the Temple

This is a much larger room than the others through which we have passed,
the floor all nicely covered with green trees, shrubbery, plants,
flowers, &c., one varying from the other in height as they stand on the
floor, forming allies, walks, &c., representing the garden of Eden. This
place being a little shaded, at least as dark as twilight, and the
shrubbery interspersed with human beings, dressed in this peculiar way,
acting out so sublime a piece, formed a sight both novel and sublime in
the extreme. (that perfumed anointing oil starts to take effect and
induce sublimity)

We follow a man here through the aisles and walks of the garden,
representing the Almighty, beholding the strange and unexpected scenery
that has just presented itself to our view. He says, "This is a
beautiful place, every thing delightful for the eye and taste---of all
these things you may freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil (pointing to a certain tree,) thou shalt not eat; neither
shalt thou touch it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die." He leaves the garden, and in a few moments another
individual comes in, representing the Devil. He walks round between the
trees, and peaks and skulks as if intent on some mischief, and coming to
the tree which we have been forbidden to partake of, he says to my wife:
"This is the best of all the fruit of the garden," and solicits her to
partake. She takes, eats and gives to me. While we are amusing ourselves
with the delicious fruit, (which is raisins tied on a small tree on the
floor,) the conductor starts up all of a sudden, and says, "Hark! The
Lord is coming; let us hide!" We are ordered to squat down behind the
shrubbery on the floor. The feigned Lord's foot steps are now
heard---coming in, he walks on the floor, at last calls out, "Adam,
where art thou?" We answer, "We heard thy voice and foot steps in the
garden, and were afraid and hid ourselves." And he says, \[angrily with
thunderclaps!\]"Who told thee that thou wast naked?" Hast thou eaten of
the tree whereof I commanded thee not to eat?" The answer is, "The woman
whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat."
He then turns to my wife, and says, "What is this that thou has done?"
She answers, "The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat." He now turns to
the individual representing the Devil, and says, "Because thou has done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life." After the man representing the Devil receives the
curse from the one acting the part of the Lord, he gets down and crawls
out of the room on his belly, dragging himself slowly along, as if
cursed indeed. To my wife the Lord now adds, "I will greatly multiply
thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth
children," &c. And to me he says, "Because thou hast hearkened unto the
voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee,
saying, thou shalt not eat of it; cursed is the ground for thy sake; in
sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns and
thistles shall it bring forth to thee;... till thou return unto the
ground; for dust thou art, and unto the dust shalt thou return."

We now have aprons put on of white cloth, about eighteen inches square,
with green silk leaves pasted on. We are ordered to kneel down to an
altar that stands on the centre of the floor, where we are instructed in
a variety of things, such as the folly and impropriety of being deceived
by the devil, and our not obeying the command of God, &c. We are also
strictly cautioned \[do\] not ~~to~~ be led astray again by the devil's
influence in any shape that it may come hereafter. We now say on our
knees, we renounce the devil forever, and promise also to keep the
commandments of God. We have now certain signs, grips, key-words, &c.,
given, and all the whys and wherefores explained. One of the grips is,
the two right hands clasped with the end of the thumbs directly between
the upper two joints of the first and second fingers. One of the
key-words is the Sun. We are particularly instructed in these signs,
key-words, grips, &c., three of each.

Fifth Degree---A Burlesque on all the Sects

After some ceremony of not much consequence, we are conducted into
another, a fifth room, which is a representation of the present
Religious world. This room is darker than any of the others through
which we have passed, I suppose expressive of what the Mormons say of
the sects, that they are all wrong and in gross darkness. The idea
conveyed of what is in this room is, that we, Adam and Eve, have
strolled away from the true ways of the Lord, and have become
contaminated with some or all of the sectarian religion of the day; or
in other words, a lapse of six thousand years is supposed to have
intervened between what is here acted and that in the room we were in
previous to this.

Our attention is now attracted by an individual coming in from an
adjoining room, representing the Devil. He comes in great glee, hopping
and skipping about the floor, holding in his hand a long-handled wooden
noggin, which holds about a pint. He says, "Good morning brother
Methodist, Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Universality, Shaking
Quaker, Millerite, Campbelite," &c., enumerating all the sects of the
day, except the Mormons: "Come, let us drink the cup of fellowship this
morning," He now drinks, and hands the noggon to us; we drink, and hand
it back. He then goes on with a long ceremony, as follows: Well,
brethren, you must have done well---had a great many revivlas---gained a
numerous host of converts, and would have succeeded in getting the world
into some of our churches, had it not been for that Joe Smith and the
Mormons. They are round everywhere, preaching that we are all
wrong---not organized according to Scripture, and say we (Protestants)
have no authority to preach, except what we have got from the Catholics,
and all the world agrees that is good for nothing. And now, brethren of
the sects, I tell you that Mormon plan is an almighty one, and much to
be dreaded---It strikes at the very root and foundation of all our holy
religion, and will eventually become the prevailing religion, unless
something can be done to stop it. It has been supposed a humbug, and
would soon come to naught. But this supposition is founded altogether in
ignorance. Now, who can not but see this (Joe's) plan is well calculated
to undermine all of us. ~~He says,~~ 'God has nothing to do with our
churches---he has never sent us to preach; and they have the impudence
to ask us to show our authority, and this we cannot do, of course. It is
true, we read in the Bible, 'Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature; but they say that commission is not to us, but
to men of the generation in which it was given. (And is not this true?)
Now, the world has been long wondering how so many ways could be right,
and differing one from the other; and Mormonism is calculated to unravel
all this mystery. They come right out and say we have all been preaching
men's precepts for the commandments of God. And now, I tell you there is
much truth in their sayings. We might as well know the truth, and then
prepare ourselves accordingly. We could do well when our authority was
not questioned; but when they come with the evidence they bring, and
say, 'They are sent by Revelation;' I tell you it is not easy to
withstand them. And finally, brethren, I am satisfied that it will not
do to undertake to hold an argument with them, and we had better let
them entirely alone, and neither hear nor read any of their books, but
keep up the popular cry, 'Oh, how great is the delusion of Joe Smith and
Mormonism! Oh, how great!' and as long as we can keep the people
ignorant of their real principles, we shall do well. Now, brethren, of
all sects, we are talking over things this morning among ourselves---and
it must not go to the world," &c.

After a long ceremony of this kind in favor of the Mormon Fraternity, we
are interrupted by an other individual coming in, representing the
Almighty. He commands ~~the~~ Devil \[, depart\] ~~to depart~~ and let
these deceived people (the sects,) alone, and trouble them no longer;
for the time has come when they shall be delivered from his Satanic
influence and power, by which they have been bound since the Apostolic
age of the world.

The Devil now reluctantly withdraws, and makes towards the door looking
back over his shoulder at the heavenly messenger, and halts, as if at a
loss to leave or stay. He is now commanded again, ~~to~~ (MORE ANGER AND
THUNDER) leave, and let the sects alone\[!!!!\]. He now drops his noggin
and flees out of the room with great haste and fury. The supposed Lord
that has acted the last part and conquered the Devil, takes us now and
teaches us the folly of every other way, that is all the sectarian ways
and recommends the one true way to us, i.e., the Apostolic way which he
tells us is Joseph Smith's doctrine in every particular. (ominous tone
in bg) We are now supposed to be converted to the Mormon faith
exclusively, in token whereof, we have our clothing changed, and are
dressed in white linen, exactly alike with a curious cap of the same
material. Another idea is here conveyed in this room, that is all the
other religions have to be renounced in turn, and this the particulars
of which we are here instructed in must eventually be embraced. (end
ominous tone)

Sixth Degree in the Temple

We are next conducted through a partition door into a room that
represents the Millenial Morning, or the holy, not the most holy, place;
on the center of this floor stands another altar erected, with three
Books on it---The Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants,
(the revelation of Joseph.) We are required to kneel to this altar,
where we have an oath administered to the effect, that we will, (more
ominous tones!) from this time henceforth and forever, use our influence
to murder this nation, and teach it to our posterity and all that we
have influence over, in return for their killing the Prophet Joseph.
They say the murdering of Smith is a national offence. It is true that
all was not personally engaged in the act; but the nation has long
winked at the abuse of the Mormons, and in this way they have encouraged
mobs from time to time, until they have finally taken the life of the
Lord's Prophet, and now it is the will of the Lord, that the nation
should be destroyed; and this is his will, that we shall enter into this
secret conspiracy against the Government, &c., for the above reasons and
many more given. We are also all sworn at this altar, by a solemn oath,
that we will never reveal to any person what we here do and see in the
Temple, during this whole farce, from first to last. If we give the
least idea or intimation of it, our lives are to be taken; and the way
of taking it is described; our bowels are to be taken out, tongue taken
out by the roots, throat cut across, &c. The Lord, his holy angels and
all that are in the room are called on to witness the solemn covenant we
here make. The individual that administers this oath, next takes hold of
the hand and gives other grips, signs, words, &c., of a higher order
than those given in the Garden of Eden."

(Breaking 4^th^ wall)

After this sixth degree the author provides commentary which I'm going
to get to as a concluding remark after we finish reading through the
rest of the ceremony. Just keep in mind what was performed in the fifth
and sixth degrees. Complete denunciations of all religions except
Mormonism. All protestant sects are in error and any Mormon who's gone
through this ceremony can't be a member of any other religion. The sixth
degree I find the most ominous, that's the blood oath portion where the
temple ceremony blames all of the United States for the death of Joseph
Smith and that vengeance would be had at the overthrow of the
government, the great Mormon conspiracy. Remember, by the time this
adaptation was instated by Brigham Young, Joseph Smith had already run
to be President of the United States and had petitioned Congress to be
granted 100,000 fighting militiamen to conquer the remaining uncolonized
United States Territory all the way to Oregon. Joseph Smith had been
crowned king over Israel and the entire world in his Council of Fifty.
Joseph Smith was a revolutionary who wanted to completely overthrow the
government and incite a second revolutionary war so he could construct a
true Mormon theocracy from the ashes of the fallen nation mixed with the
blood of hundreds of thousands of dead Americans. Wacky party-boy Jo of
the Ohio years has finally become Joseph Hitler Hussein Moussolini Mao
Polpot Ghengis Khan Alexander the Great Smith. Pious prophet? Holy
fraud? Trickster? No, evil is the word we're looking for. Joseph Smith
was a malevolent, destructive, and heinously venal demagogue who cared
for nothing beyond his own narcissistic notions of what it looks like
when a corrupt knave will do anything to corrode the universe before his
throne. Say what you will, but it's a damn good thing Jo was killed when
he was. More on that momentarily.

"Seventh Degree in the Temple

I now pass through this door, which brings me in a very large and
spacious room, perfectly light, all nicely furnished, representing the
Celestial Kingdom of God, or the highest degree of glory that man is to
arrive at in the eternal world. This being the last room representing
the final rest of man, we are now all clothed exactly alike, in fine
white linen, with crowns on our heads, representing what we are finally
to come in possession of---that is what we were ordained to in the
second room, king and queen, for that is the object of this whole drama,
to represent what has ben and will be through time and eternity. This
being the last room, we come in turn, two at a time, through all the
others, here we remain as long as we please, sometimes numbering
hundreds, all in white as before described, male and female, with crowns
on our heads, all conversing of course on the singular and unexpected
blessing just received, as pretended, from the hand of the Lord, for
which we have labored so hard, presenting a neat curious and novel
sight. There is another door that enters this room. Many come in from
that direction, that have gone through the initiation previously. This
is the reason of so many being in that room.---The law is, that all who
have thus been initiated have the privilege of coming in this last room
when they please, by going first to a certain place in the Temple and
preparing themselves with the kingly apparel before described, for none
are permitted to enter this holy place on any other condition than that
he is one that can give the signs, &c., that he receives going through
this ordeal. In this room, when thus assembled, are all the Mysteries of
the Kingdom taught, such as what is called the Spiritual Wife Doctrine
for instance. We are here told ~~that~~ this ceremony is the
commencement of the law of God, and the laws of the land are no more
binding on us; all our former ties of marriage, &c., are all now cut
asunder, and we are all thrown loose upon the world as if never married.
It is now the woman's privilege to choose whom she sees fit; if she
likes the one she has been living with, she can keep him; if not, she is
at liberty to ship him and take another; and it is the man's privilege
to have one, two, four, ten, or twenty, according to his standing in the
church, and the influence he has with the leader, for he is the one whom
they are brought before and married over. He says every other marriage
as performed by ministers, justices, &c., is null and void, and it is
strictly essential to our salvation and future prosperity, both in time
and eternity, that we are thus joined together. The philosophy of this
is, we are ordained to be king, for instance, and what is the title good
for if we have no kingdom to rule over? A king without a kingdom, would
be without honor. Here you see in a hint, the foundation of this
plurality of wives' system, and the object a man has in getting more
than one wife. He is to be promoted through all eternity according to
this theory, by his posterity, which are the subjects of his dominion;
and of course the more wives, the more numerous his posterity."

It\'s a cult. What more can you say than Mormonism is a cult? The entire
process of leaving everything behind including one's clothing and going
into a strange room with all new white clothing, looking exactly like
everybody in the room removes individuality while at the same time
requiring the initiates to swear complete devotion and fealty to the
religion. This brainwashing was used to create a society hell-bent on
overthrowing the United States government to create their own sovereign
theocracy under the dictates of the holy prophet. It's mind control.
It's an entire narrative created to put the participant in an altered
state of mind of discomfort and anxiety where the only semblance of
normalcy is their best friends and family members in the same clothing,
doing the same handshakes, swearing the same oaths. If everybody's doing
it then it must be alright. The prophet told me to do it so it must be
from God.
