---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 90 - I’ll Show You a Bonaparte'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-90-ill-show-bonaparte/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-90-ill-show-you-a-bonaparte
category: History
date: 2018-02-16 03:15:18 +0000
---

2/15/18

Ep 90 -- I'll Show You a Bonaparte

On this episode, we begin with an interview discussing 19^th^-century
American politics. Our guest walks us through the rise of the Jacksonian
Democratic party in the wake of the War of 1812 and walks us through how
popular opinion and anti-Jackson sentiments led to the rise and fall of
the Whig political party. Dovetailing off the discussion with Chris, we
jump into Illinois politics and the formation of the Anti-Mormon
political party to combat the growing power of the Saints in Nauvoo and
Hancock County politics. The Mormons organize the Nauvoo Legion into a
military parade for the 1841 4^th^ of July celebration, which a number
of politicians and dignitaries attended to show their support for the
Mormons. Jo's truly living the American dream.

Links:

Teacher's History of U.S. Podcast\
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/teachers-history-united-states-podcast-about-american/id1218263890?mt=2>

Times and Season 1841\
<http://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/cdm/ref/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/9099>

Abraham Lincoln Timeline\
<http://www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/education/polbrief.htm>

Prophet of Palmyra -- Thomas Gregg\
<https://books.google.com/books?id=H8xGAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA168&lpg=PA168&dq=senator+sidney+h+little&source=bl&ots=UIow52UU7J&sig=-hnVeNOOiA-srD3JpA4j2e6GPKs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwikj-XN1KTZAhULx2MKHd1wAvYQ6AEIPTAD#v=onepage&q=senator%20sidney%20h%20little&f=false>

Warsaw Signal 1841\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1841.htm>

Announcements:

Darwin Day\
<http://www.signupgenius.com/go/20f0b49a5af2aa02-darwin1>

Reddit AMA\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/MormonDoctrine/comments/7x94in/ama_i_am_bryce_blankenagel_of_the_naked_mormonism/>

Scathing Atheist BoM trivia\
<https://audioboom.com/posts/6675630-dontcha-come-back-no-mormon-edition>

In the Name of God Podcast\
<http://nameofgod.podbean.com/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

We're going with a slightly unorthodox format for today's show. We
usually start with the historical timeline segment of the episode and
move on to an interview or something different after that, but for this
episode, the interview was simply too relevant and it sets the scene and
provides context for the historical monologue. So, stick around after
the interview to see how everything discussed in the interview plays
into Nauvoo politics in 1841.

Chris Caldwell

Politics is the mechanism by which so much is accomplished. The truth of
the matter is, when you're a person trying to organize thousands of
people into a cohesive body, or build a city, politics will claim a
significant portion of your time.

The Mormons in Nauvoo were a massive population with varying needs and
desires. There was always the underlying need to follow the prophet and
the prophet's need to provide direction and a safe place to live for his
people. There's a lot wrapped up into just those two seemingly simple
ideas.

Today we take issue with any religious leader who oversteps their
boundaries when it comes to politics. A religious leader shouldn't be
free from political opinion, but when they preach political action from
the pulpit, that's where it's actionable legally speaking. As Jefferson
said in his 1802 letter to the Danbury Baptist Association, "I
contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American
people which declared that their legislature should 'make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof,' thus building a wall of separation between Church &
State."

The way churches are policed in actions violative of church/state
separation is through taxing. If a church acts in politics, they lose
their tax-exempt status. This is completely unenforced today and it's an
issue which has only come up a small handful of times in the court
system in the last 150 years. Many churches today participate in Pulpit
Freedom Sunday, where they literally videotape themselves making
political speeches from the pulpit and send it to the IRS, daring it to
prosecute these egregious violations of church and state separation.

These ideas we have of needing to maintain a wall between church and
state weighed heavily on the minds of the founding fathers when writing
the bill of rights. America was founded as a secular nation and when
churches have infringed upon the political process, it's bothered people
throughout American history, and it should bother everybody today while
it continues to happen every single day.

Joseph couldn't create Nauvoo and organize the Mormons without dabbling
in politics. A person can be a politician and a preacher, but when they
wear both hats at the same time, that's when they're in violation of
Church/State separation. Jo wore all his hats all the time. He was the
prophet, preacher, prosecutor, militia general, politician, and
everything in between all hours of all days.

Try as I might, I can't conceive of a way that Jo could have done what
he did in creating Nauvoo without dipping his toes in so many different
pools. Don't get me wrong, I don't think he should have done any of what
he did, but I can scarcely conceive of a reality where Jo didn't need to
spend equal amounts of time on politics as he did religion once he was
at the Nauvoo stage of his history.

People like ThomAss Coke Sharp saw the brazen demolition of the wall of
separation in Nauvoo and wanted to do what was necessary to curtail the
power of the Mormon prophet. Thanks to Jonathan Tindell, ThomAss Sharp
will be known to us as the Sharp Bastard, paying homage to his role in
being the sword of justice against Mormon overreach in the political
sphere.

The Sharp Bastard took a full swing at Stephen Douglas for appointing
Wreck-it Bennett to the office of Master in Chancery and letting Jo off
by granting the writ of habeas corpus. The Sharp Bastard had published
in the Warsaw signal the electoral delegate rationing based on
population statistics. Nauvoo had twice the political representation of
Warsaw and Sharp wanted to respond. He did so by creating the actual
anti-Mormon political party, founded for the sole purpose of combatting
the increasing political power of the Nauvoo Mormons. Sharp published
the minutes from the first Anti-Mormon meeting in the 23 June 1841
edition of the Signal:

"ANTI-MORMON MEETING.

At an Anti-Mormon meeting of the citizens of Warsaw precinct, Hancock
county, Illinois, h\[eld\] on the 19th of June, 1841, for the purpose of
electing delegates to the Anti-Mormon convention, to be held at
Carthage, Hancock county, Ill., on the 28th inst., for the purpose of
nominating suitable candidates, to be voted for by the Anti-Mormon
citizens of Hancock county, at the ensuing election: A. \[I.\]
Chittenden, was appointed Chairman, and W. B. Chipley, Secretary of the
meeting. The object of the meeting being stated, on motion, A. M.
Worthen, J. B. Salisbury, and W. B. Chipley, were appointed a committee,
to report to the meeting the names of suitable delegates, to attend the
convention, to be held at Carthage, on the 28th inst. \
\
W. H. Roosevelt then stated to the meeting that he would offer the
following resolution in order to call out any opposition that might be
felt to the proposed Anti-Mormon Convention. \
\
Resolved, that it is expedient to hold a county convention, for the
purpose of nominating candidates for the offices of School and County
Commissioners, in opposition to Mormon influence and dictation. \
\
Mr. Roosevelt, addressed the meeting in favor of the resolution, and was
followed by J. C. Davis, Esq., who replied to him in opposition to the
convention, although as he said, as much as any opposed to the Mormons,
and he again was answered by Ths. C. Sharp, in favor of the convention,
and of the objects embraced in the resolution. \
\
The question was then put to vote, and the resolution sustained with but
one dissenting vote. \
\
The nominating committee then reported to the meeting the following
gentlemen as delegates, to attend the convention at Carthage, which
report was accepted, and the nomination confirmed by the
meeting....(lists a bunch of names) \
\
On motion of Mr. Roosevelt, Resolved, That the delegates to the
convention have power to fill such vacancies as they occur from
inability to attend or otherwise."

And thus, the first actual anti-Mormon political party was organized by
ThomAss the sharp as a bastard Sharp to combat the ever-increasing power
of the Mormon religion and Joseph Smith in Illinois. Those like Sharp
who wanted to combat Mormon politics were left with a complicated task.
They couldn't just elect more Democrats or Whigs because the Mormons
weren't loyal to any one party. They weren't loyal to anybody for that
matter. The Mormons voted as a bloc for whomever it was that Jo said was
the Mormon's guy in any given election. Whig, Democrat, old school
federalist turned democrat, it didn't matter, the Mormons voted for
whoever would make them the biggest promises.

For that reason, it was actually necessary and best for the democratic
process to form the anti-Mormon party. That's how politics work.
Somebody moves into your state and becomes a new majority, you form a
minority to directly oppose them. It may not be the best system, or even
optimal by any stretch of imagination, but that's how the system is
constructed so Sharp and his fellow anti-Mormons were forced to operate
within the constraints of the system.

Sharp was aware of the system and the limitations by which it operated.
From the 7 July article:

"You need scarcely be reminded of the cringing sycophancy heretofore
manifested by both political parties towards the head of this people,
knowing well his vast political importance. As a consequence of this,
you have seen your Legislature granting them charters, containing powers
nearly, if not quite equal, to their own, without even reading the
contents of their enactments. In this enlightened age, so called, men
are found willing to frame and bring forward charters, effecting the
dearest rights of our citizens, and for the purpose of concealing their
dark designs, and fulfilling the pledges given by the politicians to
this people, their passage is urged through our legislative halls with
race-horse rapidity, under motions to read the bills simply by their
titles. In return for the receipt of these high\[-\]handed favors, votes
of thanks have been bandied about, evincing a species of flattery,
fulsome to disgust. \
\
Under this state of things\[,\] the old party landmarks of Whig and
Democrat, so far as it relates to this county, are now laid aside. The
insignia under which you have honestly fought so many well contested
battles are now furled together, and a new banner is spread out, upon
which you have inscribed the principles of Anti-Mormonism\..."

It\'s hard to overstate how powerful the Mormons were in Nauvoo,
politically speaking. Thomas Gregg in The Prophet of Palmyra does the
issue a fair treatment when talking Mormon and Illinois politics of
1840-41, beginning on page 166:

"It will be remembered that the Presidential election of 1840 was a
highly exciting one; and that during the canvass the Whigs held many
mass meetings in Illinois and elsewhere, popularly known as "Log Cabin
and Hard Cider" demonstrations, in favor of General Harrison for
President. About the last of March, one of these meetings---a very large
and enthusiastic one---was held at Carthage, the county seat, in which
some of the principal Mormons participated. At this meeting nominations
were made for a representative to the State Legislature and for various
county offices. The ticket was well received by the party, and was
placed at the head of the editorial columns of the Western World at
Warsaw, the Whig organ, where it remained until the 22d of July
\[1840\]. In the *World* of that date it was announced that Mr. Martin
Hopkins, the candidate for Representative, had withdrawn, and that Dr.
John F. Charles had been put up in his place. And what would the reader
guess was the reason for this change? The purpose of a party in thus
setting aside a good and capable man, and substituting another? Simply
this: The autocrat of Nauvoo had signified that he would not support Mr.
Hopkins! No good ground for such refusal was ever known; but to such
extent did party subserviency go, in this second year of Mormonism in
the State. It is not strange that Smith, ambitious of power, and so
lately at the bottom round of the ladder, should have been elated at the
change, and willing to use the power of which he found himself so
suddenly in possession. The result was that the whole Whig ticket for
the county was elected by an average majority of about four hundred
votes.

A characteristic circumstance in connection with this election deserves
to be mentioned. Of the names of Whig electors for President and Vice
President, that of Abraham Lincoln was "scratched" by about two hundred
voters at Nauvoo, and that of his Democratic opponent in the district
substituted. Mr. Lincoln had in some way unknown rendered himself
obnoxious to the prophet."

Lincoln still won his fourth term in the State Legislature, but wasn't
voted in as President of the Whig party, as Gregg concludes, because he
had somehow offended Joseph Smith. So yes, Abraham Lincoln's rise to
political power ran into a speedbump because of Joseph Smith... That's
the real-world implications of the Mormon's increasing political power
in Nauvoo.

To posture themselves and in celebration of the recently returned
Brigham and Q12, the Nauvoo Legion came out in full force for another
parade even more grandiose than the temple cornerstone laying ceremony.
The Times & Seasons had published an article in early June telling the
Nauvoo Legion that they were to gather in the town square for a 4^th^ of
July celebration on July 3^rd^, because the 4^th^ was a Sunday in 1841.
Attendance was mandatory, and what a spectacle it was.

A number of Illinois government officials attended for a chance to ride
around in carriages near the prophet and see the Nauvoo Legion in full
battle regalia. Joseph Smith and John C. Wreck-it Bennett gave
incredibly grand public speeches on the persecution of the saints,
declaring how great and powerful the kingdom of God was to become
rolling forth over the nation. For Mormons, this was a great moment. For
government officials friendly to the Mormons, this was a great moment in
realizing how powerful the alliances they made were. For everybody else,
this was downright terrifying...

In covering the story, ThomAss the Sharp Bastard printed this in the
following edition of the Warsaw Signal in yes/no question format under
the article heading "Questions for the Times and Seasons". We'll examine
the implications of each question and the couched insinuations as we go:

"Did Joe Smith state at a parade of the Legion, or a part of it, at
Nauvoo, a few weeks since, that some persons complained because he was a
military officer \-- but that he cared not, for he was General and
second in command to the Governor; and those who did not like it might
go to h\--l? \
\
Did he afterward say, that if they did not stop their blab about him, he
would be President of the United States, (God would give him the office
if he wanted it,) and then he would show them what a Bonaparte could
do? \
\
Did he say that the meanest horse thief in his society, was better than
the editor of the Warsaw Signal, or the highest minister of any
sectarian church? \
\
Did S. Rigdon afterwards make threats of personal violence on the editor
of the Warsaw Signal, whenever he should meet him? \
\
Did Gen. Bennet, on Saturday last, say that he would call the editor of
the Signal a liar whenever he met him, for having insinuated that he was
not sincere in the faith? \
\
We merely ask these as questions, having however very good authority for
saying that they should be answered in the affirmative."

What happened? Where's the Joseph Smith of looking in a hat and hunting
for buried treasure? Where's the Jo that was eating a ton of mushrooms
with his friends so they could see angels floating in the Kirtland
Temple? Who is this Joseph Smith standing in front of an army and
declaring himself the next POTUS saying he'll show the world a real
Napoleon?

You stand this Jo next to the Pious Joseph Smith of Truman Madsen's
Prophet series and they coincide in name alone. This is not the Joseph
Smith I knew and loved in the church, this is a powerful demagogue,
thirsting for the blood of his enemies.

With the help of Natalie on the back end, I've been doing a few
interviews lately that I'll tell you about as they release on other
podcast feeds, but the number one question I'm asked when going on
another show is also the one question I struggle the most to answer.
What were Joseph Smith's motivations? Why did he do what he did at some
arbitrary time?

The only answer I can give is I truly don't know. I may have answered
confidently a couple years ago when my deep studies of Mormon history
began, but now that I've learned so much more, the answer seems to slip
further away with every history book about him and Mormonism I read. Was
he in it for the money? Did he just want to sleep with dozens of women
and resolved to fabricate a religion to make it happen? Did he sincerely
believe in his own bullshit? Well, at long last I may have a simple
answer, a simple answer which probably won't surprise you, but I've yet
to find a single situation where it doesn't explain Jo's motives. Here
it is: Joseph Smith did whatever it was that suited him best at any
given moment. Not only that, but he did the utmost version of whatever
it was which seemed to be the most beneficial solution, for him. Which,
by extension, means he did the biggest and baddest version of anything
he could when a situation would arise and the solution would benefit him
the greatest. I know, right, it's disturbingly simple yet equal parts
unsurprising and unsatisfactory? Philosophers from Aristotle to William
of Occam would be proud with the simplicity and explanatory power.

From trying to sell the copyright of the BoM for a short-term profit, to
starting a religion to take tithing money, to excommunicating Oliver
Cowdrey, William Wines Double-Dub Phelps, and the Whitmers for running
their own religion, to the KSS company to solve 10s of thousands of
dollars of debt, to stealing the property of the Missourians so the
Mormons wouldn't starve, to signing every land contract which landed on
his desk regardless of how cancerous the terms may have been, to
building a legally-sanctioned militia to safeguard against the Illinois
militia potentially removing the Mormons as had happened in Missouri, to
producing a divine revelation to sleep with dozens of women, and every
little decision in between those major life events during Jo's career;
Joseph Smith made the short-sighted decision which seemed to benefit him
most at that very moment.

He was an opportunist. That can't possibly surprise anybody who's
listened to this show for longer than a few episodes or who's read a
single biography of the man. Nauvoo was a clean tapestry with endless
opportunities, and Jo couldn't wait to bust out the paintbrushes. For
the first time in Jo's career, the Mormons actually had a significant
majority. What incredible tools a majority would afford the saints.

And look, the founding fathers knew that demagogues like Jo would
eventually arise so they built into the constitution various protections
for the minority from the majority. It's not exactly unprecedented
throughout history where a populous arose behind a thought leader and
used their majority to bully or eradicate a silent minority. The
American political system is deliberately slow and calculating to
mitigate the damage from people like a Joseph Smith or any other
narcissistic tyrant for that matter, but that doesn't mean the
government is able to stop them in their tracks before they cause
damage, it can just reduce the impact and slowly correct over time.

Jo was in a wonderful time and place to build his empire. Senators,
Governor Carlin, justices, and all manner of politicians were falling
over themselves to pander to the growing Mormon bloc vote, and you know
Jo must have loved every minute of it. A backwoods country bumpkin who a
mere 12 years ago, now had thousands of followers, his own army, and
highly respected public elected officials were asking Jo what they could
do to help the Mormons in their plight. But really, how goddamn American
is that? What an amazing example of rags to riches. The American dream
isn't a mortgage, car payment, a white picket fence in the suburbs, and
getting a brew with the boys every Friday night. The American dream
operates solely by the central mechanism Chris iterated so many times to
us, the truth simply doesn't matter. The American dream of rags to
riches is saying whatever is necessary to serve a person's best interest
in that very moment with absolute disregard for what truth or reality
can tell us of said moment. Truth and reality didn't matter to Joseph
Smith and he lived a wonderful life punctuated by brief moments of
slight discomfort, and he was only able to live that life because he
could sell a lie and thousands of people lapped it up like dogs who'd
been lost in a spiritual desert for decades before the oasis of
Mormonism arose. Joseph Smith is the American dream. His timeline reads
like that of a grand villain or valiant hero depending on the source. He
did things scarcely believable until you dig deep enough and he built a
religion on a reckless string of lies that resulted in one of the most
lavish lifestyles in early American history, filled with nice houses,
decadent carriages, a harem of concubines, and politicians pandering to
his every whim. I don't know about you guys, but when I'm judging
something on the 'Murica scale, Jo truly ranks among the highest
echelons of the most 'Murican people in all American history. Now that
the Mormons were finally in the majority for the first time since they'd
become a religion, Jo and friends could exercise all sorts of privileges
they'd never had access to throughout the previous decade of Mormon
history.

In the Name of God podcast

Latest SA with link in show notes

Mormon Doctrine AMA Sat

Darwin Day Sunday Burke Museum
