---
layout: post
title: Ep 99 - I’ve Had Enough Trouble with This Thing
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-99-ive-enough-trouble-thing/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-99-ive-had-enough-trouble-with-this-thing
category: History
date: 2018-04-20 02:04:21 +0000
---

Red text = audio bumpers

Black text = show segments

Timeline

Any intro you like

99A "on this episode" - "Mormons in Kenya"

A2B Break

Rest of 99 A

B2C Break

99 B C with New segment "The Angel's Trumpet"

History to Epilogue

Rest of 99 B C

Outro

Ep 99 -- I've Had Enough Trouble with This Thing

On this episode, we wrap up 1841 and get into early 1842. Jo revises the
Book of Mormon and calls it the most correct book of any on the earth.
Ebenezer Robinson's belief in the morality of monogamy likely conflicts
with his position as chief editor of the Times and Season so Brigham
Young has to step in and stop that from being a problem. The book of
Abraham is finally published and we discuss how many wives Jo took in
the rest of 1841 and 1842 alone, his most active year in building his
harem. After that we discuss a recent Deseret News headline reporting on
President Nelson's sermon to a congregation of Mormons in Kenya.

Links:

Ebenzer Robinson "Not Enough Trouble"\
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V19N03_141.pdf>

Ebenezer Robinson Autobiography\
<https://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/ERobinson.html>

Manuscript History of Brigham Young\
<https://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/MSHBY.html>

"The Return" edited by Ebenezer Robinson\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/RigWrit/M&A/Return1.htm#06-8906a>

Times and Seasons editorial roles\
<https://publications.mi.byu.edu/publications/jbms/22/2/7RoperFieldsNepal_JS%20Times%20and%20Seasons%20and%20CA%20Ruins.pdf>

History of the Church vol. 4\
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/volume-4-chapter-29>

Children of Joseph Smith\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_Joseph_Smith>

Church Membership Growth Rates\
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/88mh0g/the_2017_statistical_report_is_online_now_here_is/>

Record Low Baptism Rate\
<https://mylifebygogogoff.com/2018/02/4-things-every-member-can-do-to-reverse-the-record-low-baptism-rates.html>

LDS Growth Trend Case Studies\
<http://cumorah.com/index.php?target=view_case_studies&story_id=481&cat_id=8>

Kenya Temples\
<https://ldschurchtemples.org/nairobi/>

Nelson -- 'Dowry is not the Lord's way'\
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900016023/dowry-is-not-the-lords-way-in-kenya-lds-president-nelson-says-tithing-breaks-poverty-cycle.html>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

A2B Break

Joseph Smith gave a sermon on November 28, 1841 in a small council with
some select elders.

HoC 4:456

"I spent the day in the council with the Twelve Apostles at the house of
President Young conversing with them upon a variety of subjects. Brother
Joseph Fielding was present, having been absent four years on a mission
to England. I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most
correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a
man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any
other book."

Mormons today are quick to parrot this same line. The Book of Mormon may
have some issues, but it's the most correct book of any book on earth.
This assertion is far too problematic to contend with here, but I'll
just say, if the Book of Mormon is indeed the most correct book on the
planet, why have hundreds of apologists and scholars been working to
prove its most basic truth claims to no avail for more than a century?
Truth is self-evident and doesn't require faith for it to be true. A
rock is always a rock regardless of how many people want to sincerely
believe it's actually a phaser-gun.

Prior to the death of Don Carlos Smith, Don's good friend, Ebenezer
Robinson had begun a project to publish a Nauvoo edition of the Book of
Mormon. Robinson was sent on a mission to Cincinnati to collect the
paper and typeset for this purpose in mid-1840. The mission was met with
measured success. Robinson was able to find a typeset and paper at a
reasonable price in Cincinnati and put them on board a steamer headed
for Nauvoo.

"I soon found the other foundry, and as I entered the office, I saw
three gentlemen standing by the desk, in conversation. I asked if
Messrs. Gleason and Shepherd were in. A gentleman stepped forward and
said, \"My name is Gleason.\" I said, \"I have come to get the Book of
Mormon stereotyped.\" Mr. Shepherd stepped forward and said, \"When that
book is stereotyped I am the man to stereotype it.\" I then handed him
the book and told him what size type I wanted it done in. He took the
book and went to a case of type the size I had named, and set up one
line and counted the ems in the line, then counted the number of lines
in the page and multiplied the two numbers together, and then counted
the number of pages in the book, and multiplied the number of pages by
the number of ems in a page, when he said the stereotyping would amount
to five hundred and fifty dollars. I told him that I had one hundred
dollars to pay in hand, and would pay two hundred and fifty dollars more
in three months, or while he was doing the work, and the remaining two
hundred dollars within three months after the work was done. He said he
would do that, and sat down and immediately wrote out a contract
accordingly, which we both signed, which contract I have to this day.

I then told him I wished to see a bookbinder and contract for the
binding of two thousand copies of the book. He said I will go with you
to a good bookbinder around on Main Street, and taking me by the arm, we
went directly to the bookbinder, who said he would bind two thousand
copies in good leather for two hundred and fifty dollars; which was
twelve and a half cents apiece."

Robinson had the contract signed for 2,000 copies of the Book of Mormon
to be printed by a gentile printer. However, it was run by the prophet
before the final manuscript went to print. From EoM.byu.edu:

"Joseph Smith compared the printed text with the original manuscript and
discovered a number of errors made in copying the printer\'s manuscript
from the original. Thus the 1840 edition restores some of the readings
of the original manuscript."

Ebenezer Robinson would continue in printing jobs connected with
Mormonism for the rest of his life. He wrote of the circumstance
surrounding the whereabouts of the original manuscript in Oliver
Cowdery's handwriting which Jo used to correct printing errors for this
Nauvoo 1840 edition of the Book of Mormon.

In 1889, Ebenezer Robinson began working as editor and printer for the
Whitmerite Church periodical known as "The Return". In the August 1890
edition, Robinson gave his first-hand account of an interesting
occurrence right before the cornerstone laying ceremony of the Nauvoo
Temple in April 1841.

"After the brethren had assembled at the southeast corner of the
foundation, where the corner stone was to be laid, President Joseph
Smith said: 'Wait, brethren, I have a document I wish to put in that
stone,' and started for his house, which was only a few rods away,
across Main Street. I went with him to the house, and also one or two
other brethren. He got a manuscript copy of the Book of Mormon, and
brought it into the room where we were standing, and said: \"I will
examine to see if it is all here,\" and as he did so I stood near him,
at his left side, and saw distinctly the writing, as he turned up the
pages until he hastily went through the book and satisfied himself that
it was all there, when he said: \"I have \[had\] trouble enough with
this thing,\" which remark struck me with amasement, as I looked upon it
as a sacred treasure. \
\
It was written on foolscap paper, and formed a package, as the sheets
lay flat, of about two or two and a half inches thick, I should judge.
It was written mostly in Oliver Cowdery's handwriting, with which I was
intimately acquainted, having set many pages of type from his
handwriting, in the church printing office at Kirtland, Ohio. Some parts
of it were written in other handwriting. \
\
He took the manuscript and deposited it in the corner stone of the
Nauvoo House, together with other papers and things, including different
pieces of United States\' coin. I put in some copies of the Times and
Seasons; all were carefully encased in sheet lead to protect the
contents from moisture, and a stone had been cut to closely fit into the
cavity which had been made in the corner stone to receive these things,
which stone was fitted in its place and cemented, when it was thought
the papers and other articles would be preserved without decay or injury
for ages, if not disturbed."

"I have \[had\] trouble enough with this thing". From the mouth of
Joseph Smith when talking about the Original Manuscript of the BoM after
the 1840 Nauvoo edition of the BoM had been published, he'd had trouble
enough with this thing. But, to be clear, the Book of Mormon had caused
a lot of trouble for Jo. He didn't just publish the 1830 edition and
rest on his laurels, he was caught up in constant revision, correction,
and interpretation of his seminal work since it hit bookshelves.

It should be noted at this time, as we've previously discussed, Ebenezer
Robinson was opposed to polygamy as Jo was beginning to ramp it up in
mid to late 1841. It was secretive, but the rumors were becoming too
abundant to ignore. Since the death of Don Carlos Smith in August of
1841, Robinson was left as sole editor of the Times and Seasons. To fill
the gap and meet the editorial workload of the Times and Seasons, a
friend of Robinson's by the name of Gustavus Hill was brought in to

The Church periodical needed to be under Jo's control in order to make
sure unapproved information didn't make its way into the Church's
primary propaganda arm. The brethren met to determine what should be
done when the Times and Seasons was beginning to wander slightly out of
their control. In addition to their concerns about the Times and
Seasons, the brethren had somehow flipped on whether or not Ebenezer
Robinson had full approval to publish the 1840 Nauvoo Book of Mormon
along with other standard works. Remember, the 1840 Nauvoo edition had
been edited by and given the approval of Joseph Smith. However, in late
1841 and early 1842, that prior approval of the prophet was coming into
question given Robinson's later handling of certain information making
its way into the Times and Seasons.

In a December 1841 conference with the elders, a motion was brought up
for discussion.

Vogel HoC 4:457

"Attended a council of the Twelve Apostles at President B. Young's.
Present, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Pratt,
Lyman Wight, John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff.

It was voted that Ebenezer Robinson be solicited to give up the
department of printing the Times and Seasons to Elder Willard Richards.

Voted that if Bro. Robinson does not comply with this solicitation,
Elder Richards be instructed to procure a press and type, and publish a
paper for the Church.

Moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Lyman Wight
and John Taylor present these resolutions to brother Robinson."

Ebenezer Robinson was skating awfully close to the line of apostasy. The
brethren decided the Times and Seasons was getting out of control and
needed to be reined in. This is how information was controlled in the
early Church. People were allowed to publish anything they wanted about
the Church, as long as it wasn't critical and the content passed the
approval of the brethren first. We couldn't have any of those hard
truths getting out there and poisoning the well of all the eager gentile
investigators.

In January of 1842, Brigham Young tells of the meetings concerning the
printing office and the grade of propaganda Ebenezer Robinson was
publishing. From the Manuscript History of Bloody Brigham Young.

"\--17\-- I met in council with the Twelve at Joseph\'s office. We
consulted in relation to the printing and publishing, the council being
unanimously opposed to E. \[Ebenezer\] Robinson\'s publishing the Book
of Mormon, and other standard works of the Church, without being
counseled so to do by the First Presidency...

We returned to Nauvoo on the 27th.

\--28\-- The Lord having revealed, through Joseph, that the Twelve
should take in hand the editorial department of the Times and Seasons, I
bought the printing establishment, for and in behalf of the Church, from
Ebenezer Robinson, at a very exorbitant price. The reason I paid such a
price was, because the Prophet directed the Twelve to pay him whatever
he asked. One item of his bill was \$800, for the privilege of
publishing the Times and Seasons, or goodwill of the office."

Just like in last episode, when Jo was in a sticky situation, Bloody
Brigham Young asserted his position as unofficial right-hand man by
bailing Jo out. Brigham always had a little money squirrelled away which
really came in handy when Robinson wanted \$800 just for the name of the
Times and Seasons, which says nothing of the asking price for the press
and typeset.

Here are the actual terms of the contract from the HoC 4:502:

"Friday Feb 4^th^, 1842... Closed a contract with Ebenezer Robinson for
the printing office on the corner of Bain and Water Streets, also the
paper, fixtures, bookbindery, and sterotype foundry, by proxy, namely
Willard Richards, cost between 7 and 8,000 dollars..." (\$220k in 2017
dollars)

It should be noted that Brigham's action was begrudgingly done in
response to a revelation Jo gave concerning the printing press which
corresponds with this Jan 28, 1842 revelation from the HoC 4:492

"I received the following revelation to the Twelve concerning the Times
and Seasons, given Jan 28, 1842:\--

Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, go and say unto
the Twelve, that it is my will to have them take in hand the editorial
department of the Times and Seasons according to that manifestation
which shall be given unto them by the power of my Holy Spirit in the
midst of their counsel, saith the Lord. Amen."

With that revelation delivered through Joseph Smith and the
corresponding entry in the Manuscript History of Brigham Young, the
printing press, typeset, and name of the Times and Seasons were
transferred from Ebenezer Robinson to Brigham Young on behalf of the
Church. The Times and Seasons started as an independent propaganda
publication of the Church, now it was time to put it into the hands of
brethren who more closely shared Jo's covert interests. The Times and
Seasons may have been purchased by Bloody Brigham, but he transferred
the ownership to the Church, and Jo assumed the role of chief editor for
a very short time.

Jo's editorial role in the Times and Seasons was largely ceremonial.
White-out Willard Richards was quickly employed as the editor who was
doing the majority of the grunt work while Jo was too busy to actually
contribute an editor's pen to the daily grind of regular printing
duties. A few days after this transaction was made, John Taylor and
Wilford Woodruff were appointed to management positions of the printing
office per Brigham Young's manuscript history. While Jo did acquire the
position of editor 2 weeks after this, his time was so fully absorbed in
other affairs that editing and printing duties regularly defaulted to
White-out Willard Richards, John Taylor and Willy-goat Wilford Woodruff.

So, what were these other affairs which so completely occupied Joseph
Smith? Well, marital affairs under the guise of righteous polygyny was a
major occupation of his. We'll get to that in a minute.

We've covered, seemingly ad nauseum, Jo's various business enterprises
to build his kingdom on the Mississippi. Everything needed to be
constructed from the ground up and eager businessmen were eager to
capitalize on the Mormon refugees. Land prices were fluctuating quicker
than bitcoin, public works projects were dreamt up and commissioned, yet
never completed. A constant influx and outpouring of people moving in
and out of Nauvoo, Saint and gentile alike, in hopes of gaining their
salvation or American dream respectively. The dividing line between
friend and foe waxed blurry with every newcomer inducted into the ranks
of trusted elder of the Church. Popular press was constantly ignoring
the best parts of Mormonism and overstating the worst parts with no real
idea of what was truly going on behind closed doors in Nauvoo. A
constant stream of propaganda needed to flow from Nauvoo to combat the
overwhelming negativity with which the majority of the populous viewed
the deluded, fanatical sect. Politicians needed coercion and lobbying,
judges needed to be reminded of their place, and apostates needed
punishment.

Here's a fun little excerpt from Bloody Brigham about just one apostate
who started to gain a bit too much notoriety to ignore.

"March \--11\-- Attended the high council, at the trial of Francis
Gladden Bishop, who had set himself up as a prophet and revelator to the
Church. After his revelations were read, which were a bundle of nonsense
and folly, they were committed to the flames, and he was cut off from
the Church, and delivered over to the buffetings of Satan."

Apostasy was still a manageable problem in Nauvoo, wait another 2 years
and that will cease to be the case. These were all pressures convoluting
to make life rather challenging for the 37-year-old prophet.

Then, tragedy struck in the Smith household again. Joseph and Emma
Smith's child bearing was fraught with difficulties from their first
child in 1828 which lived for a few hours but was so disfigured that
little Alvin wasn't viable. The twins, Thaddeus and Louisa, both died a
few hours after childbirth due to being born premature. Of their adopted
twins, Joseph and Julia Murdock, Joseph had perished in 1832 before
reaching 1 year of age due to complications of sickness. Finally, Joseph
Smith III was born in November of 1832, he reached maturity and would
eventually lead the LDS reorganization in the early 1860s. He would only
make it to twelve years old before his father was assassinated in
Carthage.

Frederick Granger Williams Smith, born in 1836, would make it to 25
years old before he passed away during the early stages of the
reorganization. Alexander Hale Smith would age to maturity and live a
ripe 81 years by his brother, Joseph III's, side as a leading figure of
the RLDS.

You can go listen back to episode 94 when we talked about the death of
Joseph's brother and son, both named Don Carlos. Joseph's son was a mere
14 months old when he died, adding yet one more tragedy to an already
stressed marriage fraught with hardship.

On 6 Feb, 1842, Joseph and Emma had yet another child who was stillborn.
Familial tragedies always take their toll on any person, but for
somebody like Joseph Smith, who was already stressed with so many other
irons in the fire, we can truly never know what the death of yet another
child did to him and Emma.

Personal tragedy was yet one more pressure to add in the mix. Joseph
also had a very unique business proposition coming along in March of
1842, exhibiting Egyptian papyri written by the hand of father Abraham
himself.

From HoC 4:508:

"Thursday, March 1, 1842.---During the forenoon I was at my office and
the printing office, correcting the first plate or cut of the records of
Father Abraham, prepared by Reuben Hedlock, for the Times and Seasons,
and in council in my office, in the afternoon;... at which time I
explained many important principles in relation to progressive
improvement in the scale of intelligent existence.

I commenced publishing my translations of the Book of Abraham in the
Times and Seasons,..."

Yes everybody, we've arrived at the Book of Abraham. All this time 2.5
years podcasting on Mormon history and we've finally made it to the
polarizing Book of Abraham. And I hate to do this, but we're going to
withhold a proper examination of it for another day. I'm sorry to
blueball everybody on this bucket of fun, but we have a few other
aspects of early 1842 Nauvoo history slated for the next couple
episodes, after which we'll do the Book of Abraham a proper service with
adequate due diligence.

1842 was Jo's most active year for taking polygamous wives. 1841 ended
with Jo having taken Lousia Beaman, Zina Diantha Huntington, and
Presendia Lathrop Huntington. Those were his Nauvoo sealings as of
December 1841. Fanny Alger in Kirtland and Lucinda Pendleton Morgan in
Missouri were always Jo's first polygamous wives, but Nauvoo was a new
grand theatre in which he could conduct and solemnize dozens of
marriages with little repercussions.

In 1842 alone, Jo took Agnes Moulton Coolbrith, widow of his recently
deceased younger brother, Don Carlos Smith, Sylvia Sessions, Mary
Elizabeth Rollins, Patty Bartlett Sessions, Marinda Nancy Johnson Hyde,
Elizabeth Davis, Sarah Kingsley, Delcena Johnson, Eliza R. Snow, Sarah
Ann Whitney, and

Martha McBride. That's 11 of Jo's 33 wives married to him just from
Jan-Aug 1842. Nancy Maria Winchester may be wife \#12 as the surviving
information surrounding her sealing are comparatively less abundant
being taken from a scant 2 accounts which claimed she was one of Jo's
wives. If we can ascribe an 1842 date to their marriage, Winchester
would have been 14 when she married Joseph Smith. Most historians have
dated their marriage in 1843, putting her at 15, but the evidence is so
incredibly scant that historians can't be certain of a proper date for
their marriage.

It is interesting to note that Benjamin Winchester, older brother to
Nancy, was called into a disciplinary council on Jan 12, 1842. The
details surrounding this council go no further than Brigham Young's
manuscript history with this entry:

"\--12\-- Met in council with the Twelve, and suspended Benjamin
Winchester for disobedience to the First Presidency."

That was the older brother to Nancy Winchester who was disciplined in
Jan, 1842 for disobedience, historians have no further knowledge
concerning the details of what Benjamin did to deserve derision from the
Council of Apostles. The dating of Benjamin Winchester's discipline and
the coinciding marriage to Nancy Winchester with unknown dating sometime
from Jan 1842 to Nov 1843 presents a possible confluence of events where
historians could closer date Jo's courting efforts of Nancy, even if the
marriage itself wouldn't happen for many months after this disciplinary
council of Benjamin.

A simple hypothetical could be constructed to explain the available
evidence. Jo was spending a little too much time around Nancy
Winchester, maybe getting a little too friendly, and her older brother
started asking too many questions and was called in and disciplined for
disobedience. Benjamin was disparaged and his concerns of Jo's affinity
towards his little sister, Nancy, were well-founded as Jo continued to
court and coerce her for a number of months before he finally popped the
question. This scenario isn't theoretical, it's hypothetical, but it
seems to explain the available evidence in my mind. You judge it for
yourself.

Here\'s what Todd Compton writes of Nancy Maria Winchester's marriage to
the prophet from 606 of In Sacred Lonliness:

"On May 27, 1842, Nancy Maria herself was inducted into the Relief
Society. Nancy Winchester, probably the mother, continued to contribute
to the society in 1842. On July 28, 1843, she was appointed to a
four-woman committee in the Nauvoo Third Ward "to search out the poor
and suffering---To call on the rich for aid and thus as far as possible
relieve the wants of all."

Nancy Maria must have married joseph Smith at about this time. Our best
evidence for the union is Andrew Jenson, who lists "Maria Winchester" as
one of Smith's wives; in addition, Orson Whitney, the son of Nancy
Maria's friend, Helen, also identified her as a Smith wife. These two
witnesses, taken together, make a good case for Nancy as a plural spouse
of Joseph. Though there is no date for her marriage to the prophet, the
best hypothesis is that the ceremony took place in 1843, since the last
recorded plural marriage to Smith took place on November 2, 1843. If so,
she became his wife at the age of fourteen or fifteen. Nothing more is
known of this union."

We must continue to keep polygamy in mind moving forward. The weight of
polygamy on Jo's decision-making is worth taking note of. Look, a
person's sexuality doesn't necessarily affect who they are. There's
nothing saying unequivocally that cis-hetero monogamy is the optimal
sexuality. There are a lot of claims out there that this is the best
system and anything other than cis-hetero monogamy is somehow disgusting
or evil, but no real evidence to substantiate said claims. The fact that
Jo wanted to have sex with so many women has absolutely zero impact on
who he is as a human being. How his sexual desires impacted who he was
as a human being and the decisions he made in order to realize his
desires.

There's the inherent hypocrisy in preaching chastity and excommunicating
people for "unchristianlike conduct with women" while simultaneously
having a harem of concubines. People feel rightfully betrayed by such a
discrepancy in doctrine and practice of the founding father of
Mormonism. But also, if you want to have sex with a bunch of people,
just go do it! Don't tell people they can't and then make religious
exemptions for you to do it. Also, don't lie to your partners about your
other partners. Honesty and transparency keeps poly relationships alive
and consensual. Just keep it among informed consenting adults. Now we
can argue about the definitions of those three crucial words, but those
are the criteria for a moral relationship, all other details are merely
incidental.

My point with this digression is that Jo was violating all of those
criteria and was being dishonest with his relationships and allowed
absolutely no transparency. That's 5 strikes against the way Joseph
Smith conducted himself sexually. A person's sexuality isn't important
to who they are, but the decisions they make to satisfy those desires
are what deserve our attention.

It's not irrational to conclude that Ebenezer Robinson was removed from
his job of editor and printer of the Times and Seasons because he wasn't
friendly to the idea that the prophet may have some girlfriends in
addition to Emma. It's not irrational to conclude that Benjamin
Winchester was punished for asking too many questions when the prophet
got a little too friendly with his teenage sister.

Decisions were made by Jo and his trusted elites which enabled him to
violate all the criteria for healthy poly relationships. Jo used his
position of prominence in his community to coerce women of all ages into
non-consensual relationships, all while keeping all the relationships
secretive through complete dishonesty and corruption. He did this all
while preaching monogamy and chastity from his Christian bully-pulpit.

When the assertion is made that Joseph had 33 wives and therefore did
something immoral, we lose sight of why what he did was wrong. A lot of
incredibly good and moral people have had 33 partners in their lives. A
lot of good and moral people have never had a partner. A lot of terrible
people have had dozens or no partners whatsoever. Simply put, the number
of people with whom we have intimate relationships has no bearing on who
we are as a human. Those relationships may alter who we are, but the
number has no impact on who we are or how moral we are as a human being.
How we acquire those relationships is where character judgements can be
made. That's where the conversations that matter should be focused.

BtoC Break

Naked Mormonism isn't just a show about Mormon history. From time to
time headlines crop up with the modern Brighamite sect of Mormonism
which deserve our attention. For this purpose, we need our own news
segment which leads us to proudly debut, "The Angel's Trumpet".

It couldn't be counted on any number of hands how many talks have been
given in Church and General Conference on the importance of tithing.
From seemingly innocuous talks about a person paying their tithing when
they're in a tough situation and a forgotten bank account emerging with
the exact amount the family needed, to talks about a single mother
choosing between fixing her car to get to work to feed her children and
still paying tithing in spite of financial hardships; these talks can be
found in wardhouses nearly every month and every general conference has
at least one talk on tithing. From a belief perspective and, more
importantly, a business perspective, tithing is crucial to the LDS
business model. When tithing was made strictly mandatory in the early
1900s, the Church was recovering from serious financial destitution
whilst attempting to be accepted into the mainstream of American
Christianity and reap all the benefits it affords. It wouldn't be until
the 1950s that a temple was built outside of North America, and that was
in a rich European country. The 70s and 80s were really good for the
Church and many other extremely wealthy corporations. Since the 50s the
Church has acquired hundreds of thousands of acres for cattle ranching,
orchards, and commercial developments, built multiple commercial
shopping centers and owns media, insurance, and counselling services in
addition to multiple non-profit food production companies, thrift
stores, and psychiatric and family services.

The integral piece to making this whole system run successfully is the
income the Church pulls in from tithing. This money is essentially
untraceable for any outside watchdog committees and it's completely
tax-free. Arguments can be made that making donations tax-free and
tax-deductible can stimulate non-profit organizations to provide social
goods and services where government or for-profit entities might be
lacking. You give a church a tax break, maybe they'll build a hospital
or school, or commission some wells to be dug, or at very least provide
spiritual guidance and a sense of community to impoverished areas. The
arguments can be made that this is a good thing, but those arguments
have little applicability to what we see really play out in practice.
I'm not saying whether the arguments are good or flawed, just that they
can be raised and deserve to be contended with appropriately.

What we're about to discuss, I believe, reveals a bit about the Church's
priorities and current status. In episode 97, Lawsuits, politics, and
temples, we discussed much of the church's financial and political
outlook given some indicators provided during April 2018 General
Conference; I'd recommend listening to it if you haven't as a precursor
to this segment. The relevant information is that we can easily track
the Church's growth by where they build temples. Tithing is a compulsory
tenet for temple attendance so the Church puts temples in areas where
the tithing income will pay for the temple.

If we're to believe growth indicators by the Church's own published
statistics, it's simply hemorrhaging members right now. With the
constant death rate of the older Mormons made up of the of greatest and
baby boomer generations along with the younger Gen X and Millennial
generations simply not attending anymore, the Church may actually be
experiencing a historic negative growth. Tithing income would be the
best indicator of what current membership really looks like, but those
numbers aren't available to the outside so we simply have to view the
statistics made available and extrapolate possible conclusions based on
that information.

This negative growth trend is noted by believing and ex-believing forums
alike. From a believer's blog in an article titled "4 Things every
member can do to reverse the record low baptism rates"

"The growth of the Church is stalling. The number of convert baptisms is
at a 30 year low. Missionary effectiveness as measured in Missionary to
Convert ratio has plummeted through the floor to a 40 year low. And the
growth percentage of the church is at a 50 year low. We effectively have
twice as many missionaries as we did in the 80's, yet we are having the
same amount of convert baptisms, if not less."

From a faithful blog on Cumorah.com.

"As of late December, the Church in the United States reported no net
change for the number of congregations for the entire year. To contrast,
the Chruch in the United States has historically reported a net increase
of 100-150 new wards/branches a year during the past decade...

Membership growth rates have also continued to decelerate. Annual
membership growth rates decreased to the lowest level reported by the
Church since 1988 during 2016 (.9%). To contrast, the Church generally
reported annual membership growth rates of approximately 2.0% in the
late 1990s and early 2000s, approximately 1.5% between the mid-2000s and
early 2010s, and approximately 1.0% in the mid-2010s. Decreases in the
number of convert baptisms due to the increasing influence of secularism
on society, ineffective or inconsistent proselytism approaches, higher
mortality rates among Latter-day Saints due to an aging LDS population,
and reduced birth rates have all appeared to contribute to this
noticeable decline in American membership growth during the twenty-first
century."

This same article posts other hold ups including lack of progress in
Mexico, congregational decline in South Korea, stake/ward/branch
consolidations in Europe due to stagnation, a Russian mission closing,
and overall lack of progress in Asia.

But, one place with astronomical growth is Africa. Some indicators show
Church growth to be hovering around a solid 7.5-8% compared to less than
1% in America.

HooollllEEEEY FOOOOOOK!!

<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900016023/dowry-is-not-the-lords-way-in-kenya-lds-president-nelson-says-tithing-breaks-poverty-cycle.html>

'Dowry is not the Lord's way': In Kenya, LDS President Nelson says tithing breaks poverty cycle
===============================================================================================

By[Tad
Walch](https://www.deseretnews.com/author/9061/Tad-Walch.html)[\@tad_walch](https://twitter.com/tad_walch)

Published: April 16, 2018 8:59 pm

View 31 Items

*Ravell Call, Deseret News*

*Anna Waithira has Margaret Wanaki on her back as she lines up to attend
a special devotional with President Russell M. Nelson of The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Nairobi, Kenya, on Monday, April
16, 2018.*

**Related Link**

-   [Mormon Kenyans jubilantly await President Nelson, hope visit helps
    > reduce
    > persecution](https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900015937/mormon-kenyans-jubilantly-await-president-nelson-hope-visit-helps-reduce-persecution.html)

**Editor\'s note:** *Deseret News and Church News writers are
chronicling the ministry of LDS Church President Russell M. Nelson as he
and other church officials travel to Europe, Africa and Asia. Tad Walch
reports today from Kenya.*

NAIROBI, Kenya --- To listen Monday to an LDS Church president\'s voice
in person for the first time, East African Mormons traveled hundreds of
miles in dust-covered buses, bouncing and swaying over dirt roads,
broken streets and omnipresent speedbumps that keep speeds under 50 mph.

They received a message tailored for eastern Africa, where many tribes
continue to insist that grooms or their families provide a dowry or pay
a price for a bride.

\"That\'s not the Lord\'s way,\" President Russell M. Nelson told about
2,000 Kenyans and other Africans Monday night inside a large, oval,
wooden event center styled after traditional huts in Nairobi, Kenya.
\"The Lord\'s way is to be married in the temple, for time and all
eternity, with your children sealed to you.\"

He added that if he\'d had to pay for his wife, \"I would have missed
five children, because only with my last five was I out of debt.\"

*Ravell Call, Deseret News*

*President Russell M. Nelson and Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stand together as President Nelson
gives a blessing during a special devotional in Nairobi, Kenya, on
Monday, April 16, 2018.*

President Nelson also said tithing can break cycles of poverty in poor
nations and families.

\"We preach tithing to the poor people of the world because the poor
people of the world have had cycles of poverty, generation after
generation,\" he said. \"That same poverty continues from one generation
to another, until people pay their tithing.\"

The law of the tithe was followed by ancient peoples as taught by Old
Testament prophets. LDS faithful believe God restored the law and its
blessings for those who follow it by giving one-tenth of their income to
the church.

Many Africans began saving money and planning their travel more than a
month ago to attend what was billed here as a special devotional. It
also was the third stop on President Nelson\'s first international trip
since he became the church\'s leader in January.

He set his watch on the podium and spoke without notes, declaring that
those in the audience are pioneers.

\"You folks are pioneers right here in Kenya. You might not think of
yourself as pioneers, but you\'re just as much pioneers now as Brigham
Young and the Saints were, following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph
Smith.\"

His 35-minute address was worth 16 hours of rough travel, said Palaasi
Charles, 49, of Jinja, Uganda.

\"Oh, much so. Much so,\" said Charles, part of a group of 29 Ugandans
who left Jinja by bus at 2 p.m. Sunday and arrived in Nairobi at 6 a.m.

They spent the day on a nearby lawn watching and photographing warthogs
and baboons and waiting in line to secure seats closest to the podium.

*Ravell Call, Deseret News*

*People line up to attend a special devotional with President Russell M.
Nelson of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Nairobi,
Kenya, on Monday, April 16, 2018.*

\"I wish I\'d come with my family,\" said Charles, a first counselor in
the Jinja LDS Stake presidency. He said he will return home and relay
the special devotional\'s messages to his family and the Mormon
congregations in his area.

\"I will share with them the importance of us having temple
recommends,\" he said, \"that tithing is going to break the cycle of
poverty, the importance of educating our children and doing away with
dowry as part of our culture.\"

He and others are looking forward to construction of an LDS temple in
Nairobi, announced in April 2017. Church leaders have not announced the
temple site yet.

\"I don\'t know how long it will take to build that temple,\" President
Nelson said, \"but let\'s have a little contest: See if you can build
your lives to be ready and your ancestral documentation to be ready for
when the temple comes.\"

He said it is easier for church leaders to build a temple than it is for
them to build a people ready for the temple.

He also emphasized the importance of prophets, the Book of Mormon, the
Restoration of the priesthood, family and worshipping Jesus Christ. He
said one of the great lessons of his 93-year life is that people are
God\'s children and he speaks to them.

\"It\'s no different for you than it is for me,\" he said. \"You can get
personal revelation for your own circumstances, just as naturally as I
can for my circumstances. You get it for your family and yourself, and I
get it for the whole church.\"

A total of 67 members of four LDS branches in the Eldoret area 200 miles
northwest of Nairobi met at 9 p.m. Sunday, but their bus did not show
until 12:30 a.m. They arrived at 7 a.m. and began a 10-hour wait for the
meeting.

\"We\'ve been planning and preparing to make this trip since we learned
he was coming,\" said Jane Malakwen, a food package maker and second
counselor in the Sosiani Branch Relief Society. \"We didn\'t sleep, but
we are not tired. We are full of energy to see the prophet.

\"It\'s a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. He is the second prophet to
come here in the history of the church.\"

*Ravell Call, Deseret News*

*President Russell M. Nelson of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints speaks during a special devotional in Nairobi, Kenya, on Monday,
April 16, 2018.*

Late LDS Church President Gordon B. Hinckley visited in 1998 and 2005.

Another speaker on Monday night, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles, also encouraged east Africans to prepare for the
temple. He asked them to qualify, receive and carry the temple recommend
required for entrance, even before the temple is built.

He also asked them to begin recording their family histories and to
attend the temple in Johannesburg, South Africa \"as often as the
circumstances and the finances and transportation will allow.\"

\"Nothing will bless you more,\" he said, \"nothing will unite your
family more, nothing will bless your children more, nothing will bless
your ancestors more. Quite frankly, there is nothing that will bless you
in any way more than your attendance at the temple, a place of peace, a
place of revelation, a place of joy, a place of comfort, a place of
purity, all the best things in life.\"

Malakwen made the bumpy trip from Eldoret to Nairobi in part to see
Sister Nelson, who said, \"My experience over the years has taught me
that being in the presence of a righteous African woman and a righteous
African man is to be in the presence of spiritual royalty.\"

Sister Nelson also said the Book of Mormon prophet Nephi built a boat,
LDS Church founder Joseph Smith oversaw construction of circular Nauvoo
Temple windows and President Nelson pioneered heart surgery by living
\"not after the manner of men,\" a Book of Mormon phrase.

\"We need to live our lives, build our marriages, increase our means of
livelihoods by increasing our knowledge and skills according to the way
the Lord would show us, not after the manner of men.\"

*Ravell Call, Deseret News*

*Rashid Agesa, left, Fidel Martial and Ann Kerubo sing during a special
devotional with President Russell M. Nelson of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints in Nairobi, Kenya, on Monday, April 16,
2018.*

Nephi, Joseph Smith and President Nelson instead followed eternal laws,
she said.

\"Think about something you need,\" she added. \"What would make your
life better right now? What are the eternal laws that govern that
blessing? What eternal law would you need to live so that you could
receive that blessing?\"

The eternal law that governs finances is tithing, Sister Nelson said.

Then she said dowry and bride price are manners of men. She relayed a
message from one of her African friends, and said \"You, the Saints of
Kenya, could set an example of joyfully freeing our young people from
the chains of this practice and thus begin living \'not after the manner
of men.\'\"

Sister Patricia Holland paid tribute to the Nelsons. She said Sister
Nelson\'s experience as a nurse and a therapist honed a maternal
instinct that bolsters everyone around her.

\"In fact, she has more confidence in us than we have in ourselves,\"
Sister Holland said.

She said President Nelson is a strong man, but never harsh: \"He is one
who is of the Savior\'s gentleness and the Savior\'s compassion.\"

The evening was a dream come true, said Sister Laourich Acii, a
23-year-old Ugandan serving in the faith\'s Kenya Nairobi Mission.

\"In a short duration,\" added James D\'Souza, who lives on the
outskirts of Nairobi, \"he taught us so much.\"

How this article has been dealt with in my echo chambers has been
absolutely delightful to watch. The amount of cognitive dissonance and
frustration this action by the prophet has caused in believing circles
has been even more fun to watch. It's abundantly clear that Tad Walch
and the Deseret News didn't understand how the public would deal with
this when the article was published and I don't see any rational way for
them to deal with the backlash. This is Dr. Evil stroking a white cat
levels of villainy for so many reasons.

Let's not talk past each other about this. The church spends \$40mn a
year on humanitarian aid. It organized 60,000 people to help vaccinate
African children starting in 2003. It has provided water filtration for
380,000 Africans in 2017 alone. It's trained thousands of volunteers in
3^rd^ world countries to provide neonatal care and donated 55,000
wheelchairs to disabled people in 2017 alone. This are all good things
and the reasons why we provide tax exemption to religions, based on the
assumption that the amount they save in not paying taxes will go to help
communities in need world-wide. These are all valid arguments that the
Church provides for people's needs worldwide and \$40mn/year in
humanitarian effort is more than most religions. Let's validate those
arguments and commend the Church on the aid it provides.

With that information in mind, let's view it with a larger scope.
Temples, which can cost anywhere from \$5-35 mn to build dependent on
land prices and a number of other factors, are one of the Church's
primary investments. They build temples in areas where they can recoup
the investment cost from tithing. Eventually temples pay for themselves
and begin making the Church money after enough years of regular temple
recommend holders paying tithing.

Plans for the Church to expand it's African market have been in the
works since the early 90s and there's currently a temple in planning
stages in Kenya where this meeting was held. From ldschruchtemples.org:

"In February 1998, President Gordon B. Hinckley---accompanied by Elder
Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles---embarked on an
international tour of five African countries and locations in Canada,
the Canary Islands, and Cape Verde.

During the afternoon of February 17, 1998, President Hinckley arrived in
Nairobi, Kenya, where he addressed some 900 members in a conference room
at his hotel. Members were elated to meet the prophet and traveled from
as far as Ethiopia, Somalia, Tanzania, and Uganda to be with him.
Because not all could afford a trip to Nairobi, some members joined
their money together to send representatives who could come back and
relate the experience of being with the prophet of the Lord. During his
remarks, President Hinckley said, \"There isn\'t the slightest doubt in
my mind that the time will come if you will walk in faith and patience
that a temple will be built in this land to serve the needs of this
people. Now, don\'t count on it for a few years,...but it will be so.\"

Finally, during the April 2017 conference, President Thomas S. Monson
announced plans for the Nairobi, Kenya temple. The same article
continues:

"It will be the eighth temple constructed on the continent
of [Africa](https://ldschurchtemples.org/maps/africa/). There are three
operating African temples including the [Aba Nigeria
Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/aba/), [Accra Ghana
Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/accra/), and [Johannesburg South
Africa Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/johannesburg/). Two temples
are under construction including the [Kinshasa Democratic Republic of
the Congo Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/kinshasa/) and [Durban
South Africa Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/durban/). And two
other temples, in addition to Nairobi, have been announced: the [Abidjan
Ivory Coast Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/abidjan/) and
the [Harare Zimbabwe Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/harare/).

There are two stakes and four districts operating in the nation of Kenya
with three stakes in neighboring Uganda. Many other Saints living in the
outlying regions of East Africa, who currently must travel to the
distant [Johannesburg South Africa
Temple](https://ldschurchtemples.org/johannesburg/), will be immensely
blessed by the Nairobi Kenya Temple."

Any business model which requires expanding to areas with limited
internet access, infrastructure, and a woefully lacking education system
to survive should cause anybody to take pause. And let's wrap this into
a central point. The church spends a lot of money on humanitarian aid.

Is the tradeoff of giving the Church billions of dollars in tax breaks
worth the millions it gives back to the world in humanitarian aid? Does
it spend more time and resources helping people than it does for its own
aggrandizement?

A twitter thread perfectly captured the perspective that allows what
Nelson said to these Africans to be a moral teaching. I won't say the
handle because I don't want to dox the person here, but I'll just read
it to you. This is the perspective we need to validate in order to talk
about the central issue of whether or not it's truly moral to ask people
living on a dollar a day to give 10% of their money to a multi-billion
dollar corporation.

"I see a lot of shade being thrown President Nelson\'s way for telling
poor saints in Africa to pay tithing. I can\'t speak to their
experiences (I have never lived with the poverty some of them have), but
I do feel the need to defend tithe paying to those bagging it on
Twitter.

Growing up, my parents were poor. Neither of them had the opportunity to
attend college, and my dad has spent his entire life working production
jobs to provide. They\'re in a good place now, but when I was a kid, it
was rough.

They were on WIC to feed us, and I remember one Christmas my parents had
saved everything they had to get me an Easy Bake Oven. We spent several
weeks primarily eating Easy Bake recipes because we had nothing else.

Around this time, my parents got really good at paying tithing. The
crazy thing is, poor as we were, I never felt it. My dad got hit by a
car and couldn\'t work for six months. They paid what they had in money
and time. Cash and food frequently showed up on our doorstep.

I did well enough in school to get scholarships at BYU & USU. I knew my
parents couldn\'t afford tuition. I ended up switching schools the week
before school started & though they initially told me it would be
impossible to claim my scholarship, they stunningly made an exception.

I was unemployed for six months after college due to anxiety, but I paid
what tithing I could from an internship. I walked into a local store to
apply on a whim and the hiring manager immediately stopped to say hi.
She later said she felt an overwhelming feeling to hire me.

Not even a month ago, I found out that my hours were getting cut to 16 a
week, this after my roommate moved out and left me paying \$600 a month
for rent and \$260 a month in car payments, excluding phone and
utilities. The idea of paying tithing terrified me, but I paid it.

I put out a plea for a new job and place to live on Twitter. I later
learned I couldn\'t move out or I\'d immediately have to pay \$1,200.
Not only did you guys recommend places to work, but you sent money
through Venmo. I cried all week because it was just enough to get me by.

Within a week, I learned that my car payment due dates had been put off
for a year and I didn\'t have to make another payment for a year. Then
employees in a department I used to work in kept getting sick and
they\'ve asked me to help, which has given me overtime.

Paying tithing gets you opportunities, moves obstacles, and gets you by.
I can\'t explain it any other way. It is so hard sometimes. I\'ve been
poor and every penny feels like \$10, but tithing works.

I\'m not going to pretend that it makes you rich \-- I\'ve never been
that \-- but I know that blessings come from tithes, whether those
blessings be giving souls put in your path, money being stretched
farther than expected, or opportunities to earn."

Given that perspective that tithing manifests blessings in ways we can
never understand and God will always have our back if we just pay our
tithing, the line of logic that Nelson used to tell these Kenyans that
tithing will get them out of poverty seems to validate itself. I can't
imagine any economics major who would agree with the logic that giving
up 10% of your money to a worldwide company who uses the money for
temples which don't help the poor makes you richer by any stretch of
imagination, but that's the logic or lack thereof being used to make
Nelson's sermon a moral one.

There are many ways to view this issue. I'll simply say for myself that
I think this was a truly deplorable and ignorant thing to do. Nelson and
his entourage have never lived at any level of poverty these people live
with every single day. This prophet has never been hungry because he
truly couldn't afford food. He's never had to deal with not knowing
where he's going to be sleeping at night. He's never known what it's
like to live in a completely different world aside from 2 years of his
life on his mission when he was largely insulated from anything truly
terrible from happening. Worse than that, he can't even get his mind
into a place where what he was teaching could be viewed as immoral.
Instead of trying to view this from a believing Mormon's perspective or
from an economics perspective, I'll leave you with a final thought on
how this teaching conflicts with Mormon doctrine.

**Mormon 8**

**"36 And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there
are none save a few only who do not liftthemselves up in the pride of
their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and
strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and
your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the
pride of your hearts.**

**37 For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine
apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor
and the needy, the sick and the afflicted.**

**38 O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves
for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God?
Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not
think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than
that misery which never dies---because of the praise of the world?**

**39 Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet
suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the
afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not?**

**40 Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and
cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to
mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their fathers and their
husbands to cry unto the Lord from the ground, for vengeance upon your
heads?**

**41 Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you; and the time soon
cometh that he avengeth the blood of the saints upon you, for he will
not suffer their cries any longer."**

History to Epilogue

Protest on June 3^rd^ going to church with buttons.

Contact mark about publishing graphs of stats with resignation letters.

Force their hand, either change the interviews or see a mass exodus in
your own testimony meetings.

We didn't have a patreon only episode this week. To be frank, I was too
wrapped up in a couple of other projects to get out the Monday Patreon
only episode like usual. The first project I'm not at liberty to discuss
yet but it should be in the public sphere relatively soon. The other
project was a presentation at the Satanic Temple Seattle congregation
where a friend and I gave a presentation on the role of Lucifer in
Mormonism. It was a really fun presentation and the local Satanic Temple
chapter is full of a lot of really great people. I want to give a shout
out to Lilith and Bevin for setting up the logistics of the
presentation, and to Tarkus and Vapula for their help with the video
equipment, and a huge thanks to everybody who attended. I should be
putting up the video on the Naked Mormonism YouTube channel pretty soon,
I'll update you guys when it airs.

Outro
