---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 106 - Book of Abraham Logical pt 2
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-106-book-abraham-logical-pt-2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-106-book-of-abraham-logical-pt-2
libsyn_embed: 6681552

category: History
date: 2018-06-07 19:32:36 PDT
redirect_from: /2018/06/08/ep-106-book-of-abraham-logical-pt-2/
---

Beginning video clip membership numbers from Nelson
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQ8bxQtEYTE

Ep 106 – Book of Abraham Logical pt 2

On this episode, we wrap up our logical deconstruction of the Book of
Abraham. We focus our petrifying gaze on the lds.org essay titled,
‘Translation and Historicity of the Book of Abraham,’ the LDS Church’s
official statement on this challenging piece of Mormon scripture. Is it
merely more apologetics, or is there something special with this essay
compared with other apologetic arguments for the ‘historical
plausibility’ of the Book of Abraham? No, it’s just delicately worded
apologetics we discussed at length last week. What more can we learn
from this essay? What would it look like for the Brighamite LDS Church
to disavow an historically authentic interpretation of this book and
other Mormon scripture? We use the RLDS as an analogue to muse on what
the Church has to lose when it comes to moving into an unorthodox and
progressive stance on scripture and doctrine.

Links:

Translation and Historicity of the Book of Abraham  
<https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng>

Book of Abraham and Kirtland Egyptian material  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/site/book-of-abraham-and-egyptian-material>

Kirtland Egyptian language and grammar  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/grammar-and-alphabet-of-the-egyptian-language-circa-july-circa-november-1835/7>

Original printing of Book of Abraham and Facsimile 1  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/book-of-abraham-and-facsimiles-1-march-16-may-1842/1>

Book of Abraham MormonThink  
<http://www.mormonthink.com/book-of-abraham-issues.htm#theegyptionpapyriwerenotall>

Lucy Mack Smith Book of Abraham ‘translation’ method  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/intro/introduction-to-book-of-abraham-manuscripts>

Roger Launius The Reorganized Church, the Decade of Decision, and the
Abilene Paradox  
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/issues/V31N01.pdf>

Community of Christ FY2017 Budget  
<http://www.cofchrist.org/common/cms/resources/Documents/FY17-Budget-ENGLISH.pdf>

Community of Christ D\&C 163  
<https://www.cofchrist.org/doctrine-and-covenants-section-163>

Current LDS Membership Statistics  
<http://www.cumorah.com/index.php?target=church_growth_articles>

Current LDS Income Statistics  
<http://www.churchistrue.com/blog/lds-membership-statistics-report-2017/>

LDS Self-reported Membership Statistics  
<https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/topic/church-growth>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Today’s show is part 2 of the logical deconstruction of the Book of
Abraham. Last episode was a brief rundown of apologetic arguments used
to claim ‘historical plausibility’ for the Book of Abraham, which is a
nice way to dance around the issue that it can’t be proven to be
historically probable or authentic so plausibility is the only level of
authenticity we can ascribe to it. This is the final position of retreat
for those claiming something contrary to all the evidence academia and
science has provided. Anything is plausible, much in the same way that
anything is possible, but possibility and plausibility are hypotheses
used to ascertain the accuracy of models and the scientific probability.
Theories are constructed as the best possible ways to explain all the
evidence to the highest degree of probability and theories are fluid and
subject to change upon the introduction of new verifiable information.
No theory or historical model could be constructed which includes an
authentic Book of Abraham being what Joseph Smith claimed it to be.

The only way for the Book of Abraham to be authentic the way Mormon
apologists claim, Egyptology, all Egyptian archaeology, religious
studies academia, Champollion’s decipherment of Egyptian language, and
the centuries of historical research post-enlightenment would somehow
all have to be aligned in a massive conspiracy to prove Joseph Smith
wasn’t a true prophet. What’s more probable, that all these fields of
scientific and historical research are run by the adversary, meaning all
the millions of people who’ve put trillions of man-hours in to
constructing these models and theories are all wrong, or that Joseph
Smith lied? Both are plausible, what’s more probable?

We need to understand that the majority of average chapel-attending
Mormons have never been exposed to this information before. If they have
questions about issues like these, we would hope they would google Book
of Abraham and click on MormonThink or any of the other fair and
balanced sites dealing with the issue, but more frequently they’ll see
the link on LDS.org titled Translation and the Historicity of the Book
of Abraham, give it a read, and come away relegating the Book of Abraham
to that special place of ‘historical plausibility’ which is the only
comfortable safe haven for such an absurd piece of Mormon scripture. So
that’s where we’re going to spend today’s episode, reading through the
Church’s official statement on the Book of Abraham. Three reasons for
doing so are as follows:

1.  High believer traffic

2.  Presents the issues the Church thinks are most important

3.  At the end of it all, it’s propaganda and apologetics constructed in
    the most delicate way as to not offend

One, lds.org has a really high believing Mormon traffic. They also
sponsor a lot of topics in google search engine optimization. When you
search anything Mormon related, the majority of the time the top 3 posts
are Mormon.org Lds.org and FairMormon.org, that’s no coincidence. That
increased traffic means the curious googler will more frequently happen
upon the lds.org essay about the Book of Abraham than they will
mormonthink, exmormon, or any other outlet which treats the issue from
the opposite end of the belief spectrum. Aiming our counter-apologetics
at this essay will be more effective for more people.

Two, the essay presents the issue from an official church resource. That
means it only includes information which it sees as most important to
include on a historical topic that’s admittedly rather large. That
should translate to the average chapel-attending Mormon concerning
themselves most with what’s presented in the essay, meaning we’re only
forming counter-apologetics for the most important apologetic arguments
posed.

Three, at the end of it all, this essay is propaganda. It’s merely
apologetics formed in a delicate way so as not to leave any major holes
in logic that can’t be resolved without some heartfelt asking the Lord
for answers. And when I say delicate, you’ll see what I mean by the way
they tackle the issues in comparison to how unofficial apologists tackle
them. This is a very friendly essay for those with questions about the
Book of Abraham, yet it relies on the same final point that apologists
rely on, history won’t prove the Book of Abraham to be authentic, you’ll
only know it’s true by the confirmation God gives you in earnest seeking
for truth.

Just to let you know, because this essay is a delicate wording of many
of the same arguments apologists retreat to, we’ll be covering some of
the same counter-apologetics we did in the last episode, but from a
different angle. If some of the information seems redundant, that’s
because there are so few arguments possible to prove the Book of Abraham
is ‘historically plausible,’ and no matter how many times those
apologetic arguments are made with clever rewording, the arguments can
just as easily be debunked. Regardless of the repetitive nature of the
information presented today, I think you’ll want to stick with us until
the concluding remarks. I’ve cooked up something special in the
conclusion for you guys with some numbers to back up my arguments. I
think you’ll want to know what I’ve put together.

With all of this in mind let’s tackle the lds.org essay Translation and
the Historicity of the Book of Abraham.

Translation and the historicity of the BoA lds.org

You’ll find the essay available in the gospel-topics essay section of
LDS.org or in the show notes for this episode. When you first click on
the page it only shows 2 paragraphs and then provides links to the Book
of Abraham study guide, a talk about the premortal existence and second
estate doctrine by Neal A. Maxwell which only references the Book of
Abraham, as well as links to learning resources which link to Church
affiliate websites like BYU Hawaii devotional speeches, the Joseph Smith
Papers, and a couple Ensign articles. Those resources don’t deal
directly with the historicity of the Book of Abraham the way the essay
itself does, they’re more outlets to teach the doctrine derived from the
Book of Abraham.

Once you click the ‘read more’ link, you get the full essay with 31
paragraphs about the Book of Abraham. I’ve done the work of parsing
through this entire essay, extracting the relevant parts, and summarily
debunking it so you don’t have to, that’s why you listen to this show,
amiright? We’re going to read a number of excerpts and use outside
resources to make the apologetic case for the Book of Abraham and
proceed to rip down every line of argumentation for the Book of Abraham
made in this essay. Some of the included information will probably
surprise you and we won’t even need to debunk it because the information
is honest and accurate.

The first paragraph reads as follows:

“The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints embraces the book of
Abraham as scripture. This book, a record of the biblical prophet and
patriarch Abraham, recounts how Abraham sought the blessings of the
priesthood, rejected the idolatry of his father, covenanted with
Jehovah, married Sarai, moved to Canaan and Egypt, and received
knowledge about the Creation. The book of Abraham largely follows the
biblical narrative but adds important information regarding Abraham’s
life and teachings.”

We’ve read through the contents of the Book of Abraham and the essay is
kind enough to establish in the very first sentence that the church
embraces the Book of Abraham as scripture, putting it on par with the
Bible, Book of Mormon, and D\&C.

After that, the essay provides a brief synopsis of the book and from
where it originated, but also adds this important detail providing a
loophole for Joseph Smith to jump through:

“Many people saw the papyri, but no eyewitness account of the
translation survives, making it impossible to reconstruct the process.”

I searched for quite some time to see if this claim is false as it seems
fairly bold at the onset. The factual accuracy of this claim rests on
what validity is ascribed to accounts provided by Joseph Smith’s mother,
Lucy Mack Smith. Her memoir, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith is
frequently cited for biographical information on Joseph’s early life
where no corroborating evidence exists to construct his early years, and
if her 1845-46 dictation is to be trusted we should probably trust her
when she says this, published in the Friend’s Weekly Intelligencer 3 Oct
1846 on page 211, and I’m reading this from Joseph Smith Papers.org

“After JS’s death, JS’s mother, [Lucy Mack
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/intro/introduction-to-book-of-abraham-manuscripts#6140305026117638087) retained
the mummies and papyri and showed them to visitors. According to the
published 1846 account of a group of visiting Quakers, she described a
process similar to that
of [Parrish](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/intro/introduction-to-book-of-abraham-manuscripts#1885542285885305692),
one that paralleled some accounts regarding how the Book of Mormon was
dictated: “She said, that when Joseph was reading the papyrus, he closed
his eyes, and held a hat over his face, and that the revelation came to
him; and where the papyrus was torn, he could read the parts that were
destroyed equally as well as those that were there; and that scribes sat
by him writing, as he expounded. She showed us a large book where these
things were printed, which of course sealed their truth to Mormon eyes
and minds; but we had not time to read them.” (*Friends’ Weekly
Intelligencer,* 3 October 1846, 211)”

So, that statement in the lds.org essay when it says no eyewitness
account of the translation survives is only true if we don’t take Lucy’s
words here as authoritative. But LDS historians usually regard
everything else she said about Joseph’s life her other writings like
Biographical Sketches to be authoritative, so why not grant this account
legitimacy? There could be a bit of a semantic argument where this
breaks down. An historian could claim that we have no record of Lucy
being present during any of the translation sessions and therefore can’t
prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that she was ever present and saw the
translation taking place but that’s making an argument from historical
ignorance. She had the papyri in her possession after Jo’s death and was
within close proximity of the papyri from the time they were acquired in
1835 until her death in 1856. The papyri had been in her own home before
and after the Book of Abraham was published and she was the person
collecting money from interested people who wanted to see the papyri
mounted under glass. She may have been present during some of the
translation, she may not have been. But, to claim this account isn’t
eyewitness when it very much reads like it is, that’s ignoring
historical evidence.

It’s also a bit two-faced in the way it’s ignoring the evidence. The
Book of Mormon essay on lds.org honestly tackles the fact that Jo used a
rock in the hat to translate the ancient record. However, when Lucy says
he translated the papyri in the exact same way, that’s just too
ridiculous to include as a data point in the historical model for Book
of Abraham historicity? This is cherry-picking data to construct
historical the Book of Abraham historical model and it’s dishonest,
especially because that quote is on JosephSmithPapers.org, an official
Church source documenting authoritative Mormon historical documents.

To approach this from a different angle though, the method Jo used to
‘translate’ the Book of Abraham is only worth consideration and
argument if the translation was perfect. If the Book of Abraham matched
perfectly to the Chandler papyri, it would be a great question of just
how Jo could have done it. But, because the Book of Abraham is
impossible to reconcile with the Chandler papyri, how Jo ‘translated’ it
isn’t even worth addressing, regardless of whether he precious and Mr.
Hat to do it like the Book of Mormon, or any other method. Whatever
method was used, it was wrong and therefore bears very little
examination, even though we just went to the work of debunking the
claim.

Let’s deal with the translation itself for a minute, because consistent
among every apologetic case for the Book of Abraham’s authenticity is a
redefining of the word ‘translate,’ and the essay spends a lot of time
on it. What does it mean to translate something from one language to
another? Well, real translation can only be done by a person or program
familiar enough with the original language and the desired translated
language to express the information from the original into the desired
language. Jo was originally the author and proprietor of the Book of
Mormon which was changed to translator, which definitionally implies he
knew the original Gold Plates language, reformed Egyptian, as well as
19<sup>th</sup>-century American English to translated it into the 580
pages of the 1830 Book of Mormon. He translated Egyptian once, why not
with the Egyptian text on the papyri? The Gospel Topics essay and
countless apologetic outlets carve out a monumental case of special
pleading fallacy for the prophet’s ‘translation’ with arguments like
this:

“The word *translation* typically assumes an expert knowledge of
multiple languages. Joseph Smith claimed no expertise in any language.
He readily acknowledged that he was one of the “weak things of the
world,” called to speak words sent “from
heaven.”[<sup>1</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#1) Speaking
of the translation of the Book of Mormon, the Lord said, “You cannot
write that which is sacred save it be given you from
me.”[<sup>2</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#2) The
same principle can be applied to the book of Abraham. The Lord did not
require Joseph Smith to have knowledge of Egyptian. By the gift and
power of God, Joseph received knowledge about the life and teachings of
Abraham.”

This effort to redefine the word ‘translate’ is a textbook logical
fallacy of special pleading. Why not just say Jo marklar’d the Book of
Abraham from the Chandler Papyri? It’s just as logically consistent
because words are fun to play with when we don’t share the same
definition and do whatever we want to them.

‘Translation’ is a very liquid term when we talk about Mormon
apologetics. From later in the essay we see the word take on an even
broader definition than the previous paragraph when it states the
following:

Joseph’s translations took a variety of forms. Some of his translations,
like that of the Book of Mormon, utilized ancient documents in his
possession. Other times, his translations were not based on any known
physical records. Joseph’s translation of portions of the Bible, for
example, included restoration of original text, harmonization of
contradictions within the Bible itself, and inspired commentary.

So Jo marklar’d the Book of Mormon, Bible, Book of Abraham, Book of
Moses, and the Doctrine and Covenants. The essay goes on to define the
term in the way it sees fit for the purposes of keeping Jo in the
tenuous position of Prophet of the Lord instead of con-man who lied
about scripture. Let’s do what the Church does and use our own word to
define whatever Jo was doing to bring these scriptures into existence.

This view assumes a broader definition of the words (Marklaror)
*translator* and (marklation)
*translation.*[<sup>33</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#33) According
to this view, Joseph’s (marklar) translation was not a literal rendering
of the papyri as a conventional translation would be. Rather, the
physical artifacts provided an occasion for meditation, reflection, and
revelation. They catalyzed a process whereby God gave to Joseph Smith a
revelation about the life of Abraham, even if that revelation did not
directly correlate to the characters on the papyri.

“Meditation, reflection, and revelation”? I won’t take issue with what
the essay just said about Jo’s methods of marklar because they just said
it outright, the Book of Abraham didn’t come from the papyri, it all
came from Jo’s mind. If you believe he’s inspired by God to be the
prophet, sure, this is consistent, although it is arguable that he
didn’t need the papyri if that were the case as he could have
marklared the Book of Abraham into existence by just sitting alone in a
room, whether or not the papyri were present. But, intellectually honest
historians don’t have access to the divine. If a scientist says that
something happens because of god, their methodology broke down at some
point in their calculations. The same goes for historians. If an
historian claims that something happened because of God, their
methodology is flawed because the invocation of god introduces more
questions than answers. Joseph translated the Book of Abraham by the
gift and power of god is textbook begging the question fallacy, baking
the conclusion into the premise. Redefining ‘translation’ simply isn’t
logically consistent either. This entire line of argumentation assumes
premises and moves the goalposts of the term ‘translate’. This is the
official church statement on the Book of Abraham which only seems to be
a warmed-over cobbling together of so many other lines of apologetics
for the ‘historical plausibility’ of the Book of Abraham.

Some evidence suggests that Joseph studied the characters on the
Egyptian papyri and attempted to learn the Egyptian language. His
history reports that, in July 1835, he was “continually engaged in
translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arrangeing a grammar
of the Egyptian language as practiced by the
ancients.”[<sup>20</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#20) This
“grammar,” as it was called, consisted of columns of hieroglyphic
characters followed by English translations recorded in a large notebook
by Joseph’s scribe, William W. Phelps. Another manuscript, written by
Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, has Egyptian characters followed by
explanations.

Yes, Jo and friends attempted to create their own Egyptian grammar and
alphabet system. As we learned last episode, this endeavor was quickly
abandoned. I would assert that Jo, William Wines Phelps, Warren Parrish,
and Oliver Cowdery got so far and realized they knew nothing of Egyptian
and that Jo’s trusty rock-in-hat method wouldn’t be able to truly
decipher them and the project was eventually realized to be a much
larger task than initially perceived, thus their abandoning the project
in lieu of many other endeavors which kept them occupied.

The essay goes on to discuss the relationship of the Egyptian grammar
and alphabet constructed in the latter half of 1835 to the Book of
Abraham which was published nearly 7 years later.

“The relationship of these documents to the book of Abraham is not fully
understood. Neither the rules nor the translations in the grammar book
correspond to those recognized by Egyptologists today. Whatever the role
of the grammar book, it appears that Joseph Smith began translating
portions of the book of Abraham almost immediately after the purchase of
the
papyri.[<sup>22</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#22) Phelps
apparently viewed Joseph Smith as uniquely capable of understanding the
Egyptian characters: “As no one could translate these writings,” he told
his wife, “they were presented to President Smith. He soon knew what
they were.”

If Jo were to have simply published the Book of Abraham without
attempting to construct the Egyptian alphabet and grammar, the claim
that the Book of Abraham was taken from one of the papyrus scrolls which
perished in the Great Chicago fire may hold some water. However, because
we have the grammar and alphabet from Jo and his scribes, we can
juxtapose his Egyptian hieroglyphics system to the text around Facsimile
1 and know for certain that the text of the first and second chapter of
the Book of Abraham did unquestionably come from Facsimile 1. This
argument simply doesn’t hold any water and is choosing to ignore the
grammar and alphabet system because it renders Jo’s translation
demonstrably false.

But, we can’t continue to let pesky facts get in the way of an authentic
Book of Abraham, because the necessity of the papyri for the Book of
Abraham is completely destroyed by this line in the lds.org essay.

“The relationship between those \[papyri\] fragments and the text we
have today is largely a matter of conjecture.”

It’s only a matter of conjecture because apologists make it such. The
relationship between the Egyptian papyri and Jo’s translation of the
Book of Abraham was obviously very explicit in his mind evidenced by the
grammar and alphabet system. You can see it for yourself on
JosephSmithPapers.org where they have the entire thing uploaded in
high-resolution. You can see the journals with the Egyptian
hieroglyphics taken from the text around Facsimile 1 in the left column
and the corresponding text of the first and second chapters of the Book
of Abraham in the body. There is no way to squeak out from underneath
this fact. The relationship between the papyri and the text of the Book
of Abraham is only a matter of conjecture for those trying to protect
Joseph Smith’s status as an infallible prophet of God when he marklared
the Book of Abraham from the papyri by the gift and power of God. Either
Joseph Smith or his god are fallible because the translation is wrong.
That’s not a matter of conjecture if you conduct your research of
history based on facts instead of faith.

The essay attempts to reconcile the ridiculous timeline of the Biblical
Abraham with the Papyri.

Here’s how the lds.org essay deals with the anachronism presented with
this issue:

Of course, the fragments do not have to be as old as Abraham for the
book of Abraham and its illustrations to be authentic. Ancient records
are often transmitted as copies or as copies of copies. The record of
Abraham could have been edited or redacted by later writers much as the
Book of Mormon prophet-historians Mormon and Moroni revised the writings
of earlier
peoples.[<sup>28</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#28) Moreover,
documents initially composed for one context can be repackaged for
another context or
purpose.[<sup>29</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#29) Illustrations
once connected with Abraham could have either drifted or been dislodged
from their original context and reinterpreted hundreds of years later in
terms of burial practices in a later period of Egyptian history. The
opposite could also be true: illustrations with no clear connection to
Abraham anciently could, by revelation, shed light on the life and
teachings of this prophetic figure.

Here are a few factoids to fill your ammo box. Not a single Hebrew
writing from Abraham or even his time period exists. Abraham may have
left personal writings, but he lived nearly 1500 years before the
earliest torah manuscript fragment was created. This earliest torah
fragment of which I speak is known as the Ketef Hinnom fragment,
unearthed in 1979, which is one tiny degraded piece of parchment
containing a blessing in modern Book of Numbers 6:24-26. The most
generous dating for this fragment is around 600 B.C.E., about 1400 years
after the biblical Abraham supposedly lived. It’s not a full Torah, full
book from the Torah, a full chapter, or even the complete text of one
verse from the Torah. That show you how hard it is to preserve papyri,
leather, or parchment fragments from ancient history.

The first full text we have of the Pentateuch, that’s Genesis Exodus
Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy, is known as the Nash Papyrus from about
150 B.C.E., unearthed during the Dead Sea Scrolls discovery in one of
the Qumran caves. The Dead Sea Scrolls include another approximately 180
fragments from other torah texts, all dated between about 400 B.C.E. and
300 C.E. You may notice that all of those dates are a long time after
2000 B.C.E. The fact of the matter is, it’s really hard to preserve
writing for 2000 years, let alone 4000 as would be the case with Joseph
claiming the Chandler papyri were from Abraham. The only reason we know
so much of Mesopotamian history and Ancient Egypt from before the
Ptolemaic period is because they carved language and pictographs into
stone, which sticks around a lot better than papyri, leather, or
parchment manuscripts. Also worth noting, we don’t have any original
manuscripts of any Hebrew torah writings from the original authors, only
fragments of copies of copies of copies. If we’re to believe the
Chandler papyri were written by Abraham himself, it would stand out as
the oldest papyri fragment Ancient Eastern archaeologists have ever
discovered by more than 1500 years. At very best, it strains credulity,
but the most reasonable interpretation of the evidence would simply
conclude that the Chandler papyri are what Egyptologists claim them to
be and that Joseph Smith had absolutely no idea what was in his
possession.

If the papyrus was a copy of Abraham’s original writing, we’d expect to
find multiple copies of the Abraham papyri from the interim from Abraham
to the Chandler papyri, but no such copies exist of any Abraham text
known to the entire field of Egyptology and near east archaeology.
Either the Chandler papyri was somehow the only surviving manuscript
copy of the Book of Abraham, and all the thousands of copies necessary
to preserve the Abraham’s original text from 2000 to 200 B.C.E. have
also gone missing, or this is a pathetic case of special pleading to
justify the Book of Abraham as being what it claims to be. To be clear,
Joseph did claim that one hieroglyphic character was the personal
signature of Abraham and it could be reasonable to assume that Jo didn’t
understand how ancient scripture texts were copies of copies and the
method by which those are transmitted for thousands of years, but that
only goes to further prove that he had no idea what he was talking about
when it came to the Book of Abraham and the Chandler papyri. He was
merely making claims and likely thought they couldn’t be disproven. He
may have truly and sincerely believed that his claims were true, but
sincere belief in a claim doesn’t make it any more factual. Facts exist
independent of whether or not people believe in them.

The essay goes on to draw genetic lines between Egyptian culture and
geography and the Book of Abraham.

“A careful study of the book of Abraham provides a better measure of the
book’s merits than any hypothesis that treats the text as a conventional
translation. Evidence suggests that elements of the book of Abraham fit
comfortably in the ancient world and supports the claim that the book of
Abraham is an authentic record…”

This ought to be good. A careful study essentially proves it’s an
authentic record. Let’s see what evidence the essay provides to
substantiate that extremely bold claim.

“The book of Abraham speaks disapprovingly of human sacrifice offered on
an altar in Chaldea. Some victims were placed on the altar as sacrifices
because they rejected the idols worshipped by their
leaders.[<sup>35</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#35) Recent
scholarship has found instances of such punishment dating to Abraham’s
time. People who challenged the standing religious order, either in
Egypt or in the regions over which it had influence (such as Canaan),
could and did suffer execution for their
offenses.[<sup>36</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#36) The
conflict over the religion of Pharaoh, as described in Abraham 1:11–12,
is an example of punishment now known to have been meted out during the
Abrahamic era…

The book of Abraham contains other details that are consistent with
modern discoveries about the ancient world. The book speaks of “the
plain of Olishem,” a name not mentioned in the Bible. An ancient
inscription, not discovered and translated until the 20th century,
mentions a town called “Ulisum,” located in northwestern
Syria.[<sup>37</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#37)Further,
Abraham 3:22–23 is written in a poetic structure more characteristic of
Near Eastern languages than early American writing style.”

We dealt with the human sacrifice issue extensively last episode.
Suffice it to say, yes, human sacrifice existed in Egypt, and what
Abraham nearly suffered is somewhat consistent with those sacrifices.
This, however, does not prove its authenticity by any standard of
historical measurement, it merely allows it to be historically
plausible, which is a long step from garnering historical probability or
authenticity. But what of the second claim: Olishem vs. Ulisum, is a
tenuous connection at best and any other names Jo may have happened upon
are only coincidental and superficial if we’re being rather generous.
The geography in the Book of Abraham merely consists of a list of places
Abraham supposedly travelled on his way to Egypt, it neglects to discern
direction, distance, time spent travelling, nor the names of any people
with whom Abraham may have associated in each location, merely stating
that he gained followers during his travels. The geography listed in the
Book of Abraham is largely fabricated and doesn’t comport with real
Ancient Egyptian geography. There’s even a fair amount of dispute as to
where Ur of the Chaldeas is, which is the location from where Abraham
supposedly began his journey. But, because Jo was able to guess one
location which sounds almost like another real location which wasn’t
revealed until after his death, we can Texas sharpshoot the Book of
Abraham into the realm of authentic historical documents, right? One or
two partial hits and dozens of misses does not an authentic document
make.

Next is the claim that the Book of Abraham came from part of the papyri
which was lost in the Great Chicago fire.

“It is likely futile to assess Joseph’s ability to translate papyri when
we now have only a fraction of the papyri he had in his possession.
Eyewitnesses spoke of “a long roll” or multiple “rolls” of
papyrus.[<sup>32</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#32) Since
only fragments survive, it is likely that much of the papyri accessible
to Joseph when he translated the book of Abraham is not among these
fragments. The loss of a significant portion of the papyri means the
relationship of the papyri to the published text cannot be settled
conclusively by reference to the papyri.”

This is a red-herring and only relevant if the Egyptian grammar and
alphabet from 1835 didn’t exist. But we already bludgeoned this
red-herring, so let’s move on to the central point it’s trying to
distract from. The claim is that the Book of Abraham was included in the
papyri but was part of the collection lost in the Great Chicago fire of
1871. This is a case of special pleading using historical ignorance to
the advantage of the apologist. The problem with this line of
argumentation is that no other similar papyrus scroll has had a book of
the bible attached to a common Book of the Dead or Book of Breathings as
comprised the Chandler collection.

In order for this to be true, we’re supposed to believe that Joseph
Smith happened to have the one papyrus collection in his possession
which stands out from every other papyrus collection of the thousands of
collections discovered that included a heretofore unknown book of the
Bible written by father Abraham himself. To put that in modern terms,
that would be like finding an original manuscript of the gospel of Mark
appended to an obituary in your local paper today without any copy of
the Bible ever existing before that to be the source for it. With all
the logical gaps and pitfalls arising from the sheer absurdity of this
claim, I can scarcely craft an analogy that fits. It’s an argument from
historical ignorance with absolutely no evidence to back it up, with an
1800 year cultural and religious anachronism built on top of a
confluence of special pleading fallacies all working in symphony. And
even if we were to grant all those fallacies, it’s still a disingenuous
assertion based on the text of the published Book of Abraham only. What
I mean by that is that the Facsmilies were originally printed in the
Times and Seasons in 1842 with the accompanying translations of the
images and the text which followed in the Book of Abraham was based on
the information in the facsimiles and their translations, all of which
is evidenced by the grammar and alphabet system.

The claim that the Book of Abraham is somehow separate from the
facsimiles, which Jo himself corrected when Reuben Hedlock made the
printing plates for publishing, isn’t supported by the evidence, thus
nullifying the entire argument made by the essay paragraph we just read
as well as one of the primary arguments used by apologists to claim
plausibility for the Book of Abraham. This is intellectually dishonest
at best interpretation and downright lying based on willful ignorance to
perpetuate a known false narrative at worst.

The next segment deals with the rediscovery of the papyri in 1966 and
the ensuing debate which followed among Egyptologists.

“The discovery of the papyrus fragments renewed debate about Joseph
Smith’s translation. The fragments included one vignette, or
illustration, that appears in the book of Abraham as facsimile 1. Long
before the fragments were published by the Church, some Egyptologists
had said that Joseph Smith’s explanations of the various elements of
these facsimiles did not match their own interpretations of these
drawings. Joseph Smith had published the facsimiles as freestanding
drawings, cut off from the hieroglyphs or hieratic characters that
originally surrounded the vignettes. The discovery of the fragments
meant that readers could now see the hieroglyphs and characters
immediately surrounding the vignette that became facsimile 1.

None of the characters on the papyrus fragments mentioned Abraham’s name
or any of the events recorded in the book of Abraham. Mormon and
non-Mormon Egyptologists agree that the characters on the fragments do
not match the translation given in the book of Abraham, though there is
not unanimity, even among non-Mormon scholars, about the proper
interpretation of the vignettes on these
fragments.[<sup>27</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#27) Scholars
have identified the papyrus fragments as parts of standard funerary
texts that were deposited with mummified bodies. These fragments date to
between the third century B.C.E. and the first century C.E., long after
Abraham lived.”

It comes by the fact that the papyri were made long after Abraham lived
honestly, that is commendable standalone. However, previously in the
essay it claimed that the Book of Abraham could have descended from
copies of copies to be included in the lost scrolls, which we’ve
established as a special pleading fallacy based on historical ignorance.
It is, therefore, not commendable that the essay is honest in this
passage when it already poisoned the well with the previous passage
about the Book of Abraham coming from the missing papyri.

Let’s examine one line in there though: “None of the characters on the
papyrus fragments mentioned Abraham’s name or any of the events recorded
in the book of Abraham. Mormon and non-Mormon Egyptologists agree that
the characters on the fragments do not match the translation given in
the book of Abraham…” that statement stands alone extremely well. But,
with everything else in the essay, it’s carved out this little place
where the Book of Abraham can live, and it further sets those boundaries
when it says, “though there is not unanimity, even among non-Mormon
scholars, about the proper interpretation of the vignettes on these
fragments.” That reeks of dishonesty. Well, there isn’t unanimous
scientific consensus on the oblate-spheroid model of the earth,
therefore a flat earth is possible. That’s not how it works. Just
because there isn’t consensus among academia doesn’t mean that a radical
interpretation of the evidence is any more probable. The proper vs.
improper interpretation of the hieroglyphics surrounding the facsimiles
lies within very strict margins of error. Those margins do not include
room for the Book of Abraham text. This is deliberately misleading.

But everything we’ve discussed today doesn’t matter. Would you like to
know why? Because we can’t evaluate a book of scripture through
verifiable academic standards. The only metric that matters is how it
scripture makes you feel, even after overstating the evidence and
relying on myriad logical fallacies and diversions in an attempt to make
an academic argument for its authenticity.

“On many particulars, the book of Abraham is consistent with historical
knowledge about the ancient
world.[<sup>3</sup>](https://www.lds.org/topics/translation-and-historicity-of-the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng#3) Some
of this knowledge, … had not yet been discovered or was not well known
in 1842. But even this evidence of ancient origins, substantial though
it may be, cannot prove the truthfulness of the book of Abraham any more
than archaeological evidence can prove the exodus of the Israelites from
Egypt or the Resurrection of the Son of God. The book of Abraham’s
status as scripture ultimately rests on faith in the saving truths found
within the book itself as witnessed by the Holy Ghost.”

That seems a rather bold and defensible conclusion. The Book of Abraham
should be believed by the same metric as the Bible and Book of Mormon.
That’s sound reasoning, but not in the way they mean it. I’m happy to
relegate the Book of Abraham to the same realm of absurdity as most
other books of scripture, albeit not from ancient origins as the Bible
is, but closer in time to the Book of Mormon. They’re all equally absurd
in their claims and the Book of Mormon and the Book of Abraham have the
exact same degree of historical verifiability, none.

Let’s get meta for a minute here.

If the Book of Abraham is what Joseph Smith claimed it to be, would that
prove him to be a true prophet of God? If he translated the Egyptian
papyri by the gift and power of God, as claimed, and the translation
were 100% accurate, would that make him a true prophet? Further, if the
Book of Abraham were a perfect translation of the contents on the
Egyptian papyri, and all the issues we’ve discussed in this 4-part
series didn’t exist, wouldn’t that inevitably cause every Egyptologist
to convert to Mormonism? It’s a profound situation, an unlearned man
knowing no Egyptian and only a passing familiarity with reading and
writing English making a perfect translation of ancient Egyptian papyri
with 0 errors, it would be hard to find a naturalistic explanation for
that other than him being enlightened by God…. I mean, maybe he
plagiarized the translation from somebody else, that would explain it,
but the narrative as it stands being true would cause some serious need
for examination and likely lead many to conclude Joseph was a true
prophet.

Let’s consider the inverse of that proposition. If Joseph Smith claimed
to translate the Book of Abraham from Egyptian papyri and it’s 100%
inaccurate and any similarities to his translation and the real
Egyptological translation are purely superficial and coincidental in
nature, would that disprove him to be a prophet of God? If Jo translated
something with God’s power, and the translation is completely wrong,
does that make him a false prophet and by extension completely disprove
Mormonism? These are only questions which a tiny percentage of the human
population has to wrestle with, and even the majority of Mormons are
unaware of the issues we’ve discussed with the Book of Abraham, but
these are important issues and represent some problematic history for
the truth claims of Mormonism and Joseph Smith’s entire story. We’ll get
to the concluding thoughts after a quick word from our sponsor this
week, 49dollarsites.com Stay tuned\!

49dollarsites.com

There’s been a lot happening on the back end over here at Ground Gnomes
studios. One of our many projects has been to completely rebuild the
nakedmormonismpodcast.com website from the ground up.

So, this week, I’m giving everybody a simple call-to-action. I want
everybody to go to nakedmomonismpodcast.com and just look at the site.
Take 30 seconds to click around to a few links and see what it’s like.
You’ll quickly notice how incredibly basic and cumbersome it is. When I
built the site I just put a few things together with hopes that it would
be functional and I haven’t done any major work to it since. The site is
hard to navigate, it’s tough to find a specific episode in the backlog
and it’s a white background with huge walls of text and like one or two
images to try and spice it up. It’s really bad and not mobile-friendly
whatsoever.

Our sponsor for this and next week’s shows is 49dollarsites.com. I’ve
been working with their expert web development team to get the new
website absolutely perfect. We’ve gone back and forth with multiple
drafts of the site and they’ve been tweaking everything to fine-tune it
to satiate my neurotic personality when it comes to things like this.
It’s been a really amazing experience working with the
49dollarsites.com team and I’m excited for all of you to see what their
team has in store for everybody.

The new site will launch on Wednesday June 13<sup>th</sup> and next
episode I’m going to ask you to go to the site again and see what
incredible improvements have been made. We’ll be talking about a ton of
new features, new pages on the site, the revamping of the episode
backlog, and everything else that makes the new website really
user-friendly and much better-looking than it currently is. But, if you
haven’t seen the old website before seeing the new site, you won’t
understand just how much of a major overhaul 49dollarsites.com has done.

So that’s my very simple call-to-action this week. Pull up your phone or
computer browser, type in nakedmormonismpodcast.com, click around and
see what a website looks like when it’s built by somebody who has no
idea what they’re doing. That way when you see the new site next week,
you’ll see the magic that 49dollarsites.com can create for your small
business. If you or your small business can’t wait until next week to
have an awesome new website, when you sign up at 49dollarsites.com use
promo code ‘Naked’ and get a free upgrade to the pro package. Once
again, that’s 49dollarsites.com promo code ‘Naked’. I can’t wait to
share everything we have in store for you next week.

With that, let’s get back to the show.

Community of Christ on BoA

So, what is the Church left to do when it comes to the Book of Abraham?
The same thing it’s been doing for what seems like a few decades by this
point, passively distance itself from this damning piece of Mormon
scripture. It retains the teachings. The first and second estate
doctrine is integral to the plan of salvation and Mormon eschatology,
Kolob and the earth being organized from combined materials and our
spirits being intelligences, God’s day being one thousand years to us
and other useful bits of astrology, all are attributable to the Book of
Abraham alone and the Church has published and expounded on these
teachings for over a century and a half with accompanying graphs and
images. The Church has enough juris prudence by this point concerning
these deeper doctrines that it’s now possible to simply ignore the Book
of Abraham, which is a smart move, and sort of what it’s been doing for
a few decades now. I’ve met a lot of people who have left because of the
Book of Abraham, but never met somebody who joined because of it. People
may join because of the doctrine and teachings deriving from it, but the
history surrounding The Book of Abraham has shattered a lot of
testimonies and dried up probably millions in tithing funds. That
trajectory will continue.

If clinging to the Book of Abraham and continuing to lose members and
tithing because of it is viewed as a problem, it won’t be fixed by
approaching it with the same non-solutions employed up to this point. It
needs to be dealt with differently. I don’t have a solution to offer and
I think the longer the Church continues to bleed members because of the
Book of Abraham among myriad other social and doctrinal concerns is a
trend which shouldn’t need altering. Full stop. Let it bleed. Let the
Church continue to flounder in its antiquity and hemorrhage members and
shady non-taxable tithing income.

That said, I’m always an advocate for viewing issues through an
alternate lens or perspective when possible. So, let’s consider this
from the Mormon leadership’s perspective. It’s no single person’s fault
or even a single leadership body’s fault they find themselves in this
untenable position with the entirety of Mormon scripture. Joseph Smith
could be blamed, and rightfully so, but the sequence of events since
1842 have been completely out of the control of the Church and it’s only
ever acted reactionary and isolationist, never proactively, much less
humbly and accepting to criticism. They’re stuck in over a century and a
half of hand-waving, twisting facts, and marking the hits while ignoring
the misses all perpetuated by a faith tradition that claims to be
operating by direction from God. God isn’t supposed to be the author of
confusion, he’s supposed to be the source of enlightenment and burned
bosoms. The Book of Abraham, however, is not only confusing, but
damaging to claims of benevolence of the Mormon God.

We could look at the way other Mormon denominations have dealt with
problematic scripture, which brings us to our concluding remarks. The
Community of Christ evolved from the RLDS Church, that’s the church
which was aggregated by Joseph Smith’s son, Joseph III. I want you to
pay attention to some of the stats I’m about to throw around and let’s
see if we can draw any conclusions from using the RLDS as an analogue.

The RLDS, now called the Community of Christ since 2001, has a living
book of Doctrine and Covenants and the last time they added to it was
D\&C 165 in 2016. They truly cling to the doctrine that new revelation
supersedes old and the living President and Quorum of Apostles know how
to best direct Church affairs through these newly revealed teachings
that are voted upon for canonization.

The RLDS Church went through a painful growing pain phase throughout the
late 70s into the early 2000s. W. Grant McMurray, the first president of
the RLDS church who wasn’t a literal descendant of Joseph Smith,
catalyzed the final capstone of many major reformative processes,
culminating in the three-year period known as the “Transformation 2000”.
At the end of this a vote was held to change to RLDS to the Community of
Christ, which was formalized in 2001. There’s a really fascinating
article from Dialogue, a Journal on Mormon Thought chronicling the
evolution of the RLDS church and its stance on scripture and doctrine
since the Reorganization occurred in the 1860s. The article by Roger
Launius was written in 1998, prior to the RLDS becoming the Community of
Christ in 2001. He goes through the justifications used to make
progressive decisions within the Church. There was an interplaying
disagreement about whether to hold to the hardline more conservative
approaches to doctrine and theology to remain distinct from the other
Protestant Christian sects, or to progress into a denominational
direction and view doctrine and theology with a more progressive and
less-orthodox perspective. The latter won out, but the shift wasn’t met
without resistance. I’ll spare you the infighting and cut to the chase.

Launius reports the numbers to make his case. This is a long extract but
removing anything would understate the issue, so please bear with me.

“The theological confusion and thereby lack of identity that have been
present for the last twenty years have been manifest in numerous ways
for some time. By every quantitative measure one can reasonably use…the
Reorganized Church is on course for extinction. For example, the church
has entered a negative growth track in North America and projections for
the future are dismal…, \[I\]n all of North America membership peaked at
almost 173,000 in 1982; it has dropped 10 percent to about 156,000 since
then. At no time in that period has the North American membership been
higher than the year before. Membership in stakes, areas where the
greatest concentrations of Saints lived and all of which were in North
America, peaked at just over 60,000 in 1977 and has dropped 13 percent
since then. An important measure of health in any church is the number
of new members gained. In this regard note that there were over 4,500
baptisms in North America in each year from 1960 through 1964, while
there were just over 1,500 baptisms in both 1994 and 1995. North
American baptismal rates exhibited a steady decline from over 3 percent
in 1960 to just under 1 percent in 1995. Since the church leadership
report total membership most of the time, and refrain from breaking it
down, total numbers for the church still look about the same as they
have been for a generation, hovering at the quarter of a million mark
worldwide because of larger numbers of baptisms in the Third World.”

“But total membership numbers are basically trailing statistical
indicators, rather than leading ones. They depict all individuals whose
names are still formally on the church's rolls. Very few people upset
over the direction of the church have taken action to remove their names
from RLDS roles. Indeed the chief strategist for the traditionalist
dissent in the church, Richard Price, specifically recommended that
members not formally withdraw from the church so they could remain in a
position, among other reasons, to affect Reorganization policy.12 The
Reorganization's leadership also emphasized that "Withdrawals from
church membership are at the initiative of the member. Recorders and
pastors should avoid letters or phone calls that have the effect of
suggesting to inactive members that they should consider withdrawing."13
With both sides of the debate favoring retention of members on RLDS
rolls, it is probable that the total official membership is
significantly inflated above the number active in the church. If so, the
strength of the RLDS church in North America has declined even more
precipitously than the real numbers demonstrate.”

“The crisis of identity enveloping the Reorganized Church at the end of
the twentieth century has ensured that the decade of the 1990s is a
period of crisis. Church members have to reshape the intellectual
underpinnings of the religion or fold their tents and go home. The time
left to complete that task is short, for the very real warning signals
of a church on the verge of collapse are present even today. They will
become even more prominent in the next score of years as the stalwarts
supporting the present institution depart the scene and are not replaced
with a younger generation of RLDS members bent on sacrificing for the
ideals, howsoever they might be interpreted, of the Restoration. Indeed,
failure to forge a new dynamic identity will spell the doom of the
Reorganization.”

And what, might you ask, was the justification behind this shift?

“Apostle Clifford A. Cole told a gathering of high priests in 1971 that
"we are shifting from an emphasis on distinctives—that is, on the ways
we are different from other \[Christian\] churches—to a concern for
teaching the whole gospel of Jesus Christ and winning persons to
committing themselves to Him."5

That article was written in 1998 before the RLDS became the Community of
Christ in 2001. In 2007 a revelation was given included as CoC D\&C 163
which says in part:

“7 a. Scripture is an indispensable witness to the Eternal Source of
light and truth, which cannot be fully contained in any finite vessel or
language. Scripture has been written and shaped by human authors through
experiences of revelation and ongoing inspiration of the Holy Spirit in
the midst of time and culture.

b. Scripture is not to be worshiped or idolized. Only God, the Eternal
One of whom scripture testifies, is worthy of worship. God’s nature, as
revealed in Jesus Christ and affirmed by the Holy Spirit, provides the
ultimate standard by which any portion of scripture should be
interpreted and applied.

c. It is not pleasing to God when any passage of scripture is used to
diminish or oppress races, genders, or classes of human beings. Much
physical and emotional violence has been done to some of God’s beloved
children through the misuse of scripture. The church is called to
confess and repent of such attitudes and practices.

d. Scripture, prophetic guidance, knowledge, and discernment in the
faith community must walk hand in hand to reveal the true will of God.
Follow this pathway, which is the way of the Living Christ, and you will
discover more than sufficient light for the journey ahead.”

Essentially, the Community of Christ has done everything in it’s power
to actively distance itself from everything which distinguished itself
as Mormon. They don’t hold to the Book of Mormon or Pearl of Great
Price, including the Book of Abraham, as anything more than divinely
inspired musing of a 19<sup>th</sup>-century charismatic Christian
minster named Joseph Smith. They ordain women to the priesthood and
don’t discriminate based on sexual identity or preference, ethnicity,
or any other distinguishing characteristic. They don’t practice any
Masonic temple rituals and their historic sites and temples are
available for open attendance to the public. Even though they went
through this challenging growing and progress phase, the membership has
never recovered. There’s no telling where it would be had they not
massively revamped everything and held fast to the orthodox rod. Their
membership today sits around the same as it did in the late 90s, around
250,000, growth is completely flat. What’s more is there’s no telling
how much of that number is continually active and tithe-paying as the
number suffers from many of the same statistical constraints when
attempting to estimate Brighamite LDS numbers, and we’ll discuss those
momentarily.

So, let’s use the RLDS, now Community of Christ, as the best available
analogue and see what a major 4-decade long revamp of Brighamite
doctrine and theology may entail as a thought experiment. Let’s say the
Brighamite Church comes out tomorrow and says they’re taking a
progressive stance on scripture and doctrine and goes about this same
trajectory as the RLDS experienced, what might that look like?

Right off the bat we’re constrained by the Church’s membership
statistics. As of 2017 they self-reported just a hair over 16,000,000
members worldwide. Before analyzing what a precipitous drop in
membership numbers would look like, let’s try to get the most accurate
number we can, because it’s well-known that number is quite inflated,
and here’s why.

As is the case stated in the article about RLDS membership numbers,
Brighamite LDS numbers don’t go down when somebody goes inactive. It
requires people to proactively send a letter to their local leader and
explicitly state they want their names removed from the records. The
VAST majority of inactive members never send in that letter. Their
membership is accounted in the 16 million number, but they don’t
regularly attend and don’t pay tithing and for all intents and purposes,
their membership is only on paper. Also not accounted for is double
affiliation. When a member joins the LDS church and then leaves to join
another church, their name is counted as a member of the Church, even
though they attend another church. For example, Tonga and Western Samoa
have the world’s highest percentages of Mormon population, 42 and 28
percent respectively, but they also have the highest rates of double
affiliation at 21 and 24 percent respectively. This same trend follows
in central and South America and many African countries of members who
get baptized and leave soon after, but their membership is still
counted.

There’s also the “address unknown” file of members. When members move
they, or a family member, has to transfer the records to the new ward
the members will be moving to. Often times this doesn’t happen or takes
a long time to become resolved. In America and Europe, the address
unknown membership records are usually resolved within 6 to 9 months and
rectified, but in central and south America and third world countries,
those “address unknown” members often will never be resolved, the Church
will never get updated records, and the members will still be counted in
the 16 million even if they never attend again after moving somewhere
new.

Retention rates for converts outside the U.S. are shockingly low.
Sociologist Armand Mauss stated that “75 percent of foreign converts are
not attending church within a year of conversion. In the United States,
50 percent of the converts fail to attend after a year.” Further, as 80
percent of LDS converts occur outside the U.S., only 30% of converts
worldwide become active or participating members of the Church.

If we’re to believe the 2017 statistics reported by the Church, overall
membership numbers are flawed, but stake and ward creation are a much
better indicator of attendance. 2017 was the first year in nearly a
century that saw a net 0 ward creation. New wards and stakes were
created, but enough were closed or consolidated due to lack of
attendance that the net gain was 0. Growth, for the first time since the
1930 went below 1% in the United States and the highest percentage of
growth is in Africa at 8% where they announced new temples, but the
retention rates of African members 1 year after baptism is abysmally
low. All these indicators show the current Brighamite LDS Church is in
really bad shape.

If we’re EXTREMELY generous with a really broad estimate, if each ward
or branch has 250 members on average, which is a REALLY high estimate,
with 30,506 wards and branches worldwide, that puts total active
attending membership a little over 7.5 million people, less than half of
the reported statistic. That is an incredibly generous estimate as most
branches are comprised of 75-150 people and very few wards outside of
Utah reach over the 300-person mark. Many other outlets have estimated
somewhere between 30-35% of that 16 million number as being active,
tithe-paying members, putting the active membership numbers at a woeful
4.5-5 million people, which is probably much more accurate than our
earlier calculation of 7.5 million.

Convert baptisms have also flatlined since the late 90s, hovering around
a quarter of a million each year with a few blips above and below that
number. Even with the increase in missionary numbers, new converts have
drastically underperformed. Resignations from Quitmormon alone in the
past 3 years have nearly hit 20,000 people, about 1/5 of the total
estimated resigned members for the past 6 years which sits at a
comfortable 108,000 since 2012, but again, that’s only people who
proactively take the time and effort to send in their resignation
letter, that’s not at all indicative of people who go inactive and never
pay the Church any mind.

What about tithing income. Since the books are closed to the public
these numbers are all estimate based on a number of factors, so keep
that in mind. The most prominent feature of the roughly $8 bn/year
income in tithing is that it’s very heavily front loaded with members in
the U.S. If we’re to believe the Church’s self-reported statistics on a
percentage basis for membership numbers, roughly 35-40% of their
membership is based in the U.S., but upwards of 80% of tithing income is
from the U.S. We could surmise that the majority of tithing income
doesn’t come from the average member who pays less than $10k/year in
tithing, but from a small percentage of extremely wealthy Mormons like
Mitt Romney who likely pays around $1.5 mn/year in tithing and untold
amounts in other monetary and non-liquid donations. This is a really
top-heavy tithing income structure and it’s very fragile.

Now that we have a snapshot of what Brighamite Mormon membership numbers
look like, what would a major 3-decade long reformation like the RLDS
trudged through look like estimated by the hard numbers only?

From 1951-65 the RLDS had a net increase of around 2.5%, which dropped
to about 1.25% in the following decade and a half to 1980. From
1980-1995 it had an increasing loss growing from -1%-about -1.75% and
the trend has roughly held true. They’ve been able to balance the
bleeding of their North America numbers by increasing baptisms abroad,
but that missionary work has diminishing returns on tithing income. In
1950, 85% of total RLDS membership was in North America. By 1995, that
number was down to only 62% of worldwide membership being in North
America. A similar trend has been affecting the Brighamite LDS Church.

A simple calculation of current Community of Christ membership vs
tithing income would yield a result that each of the 250,000 members is
responsible for $68/year of tithing to make up their current 17,000,000
budget. That same calculation would yield that each individual member of
the 5 million active Brighamite LDS is responsible for $1,600/year to
comprise the $8,000,000,000 in estimated tithing income. If we’re to
estimate a very conservative 2% decrease per year of active,
tithe-paying members in the Brighamite church every year, with each of
them responsible for $1,600 of tithing income, that’s an estimated
100,000 members and $160,000,000 lost every year in tithing income alone
that needs to be made up for through new converts. If new converts in
wealthy western countries continues to tank at the current rate, the
Church will begin to see a net loss instead of the plateau it’s
currently riding on, which will only increase that lost tithing amount.

To be clear, the LDS Church has one hell of a bumper crop in place with
their diversity of investments. If the recent revelation from
Mormonleaks is to be believed, they control billions in hedge funds,
real estate holdings, media and insurance companies, and all sorts of
other investments that could be liquidated to bandage the bleeding, but
those resources are finite and they will dry up. Maybe not in a decade
or even 5 decades, but given enough time and the rectifying of tax
loopholes churches currently enjoy, the Brighamite LDS Church and its
likely hundreds of billions in assets and holdings will eventually
decay.

What’s scary about this forecasting estimation exercise is there’s no
way to know if going a more progressive route will help or hurt the
bleeding in the long run. It can continue to remain orthodox and likely
see a steady or even increased rate of attrition as the older more
conservative generation continues to die off and isn’t replaced by
younger generations. Or, it could go progressive the way the RLDS did
from 1970-2000 and deal with the initial shock of a mass-exodus of
orthodox believers who’ll likely die off anyway within the next few
decades but shift to a more progressive church and appeal to the younger
generation, thus building in sustainability. There’s simply no way to
know what the best solution for them is.

One thing is certain. The longer they continue to ignore important
social issues. The longer they cling to demonstrably false scripture
like the Book of Abraham contrary to what all scientific evidence tells
us. The longer they believe in racist doctrines and don’t excise them
from canon and refuse to apologize for them, or even acknowledge
wrong-doing on their part. The longer they withhold the priesthood from
women and non-gender binary people. The longer they tear families apart
and tell LGBTQ people they can’t live in a happy relationship while
still fulfilling the law of chastity. The longer they practice
closed-door one-on-one interviews with bishops. The more they refuse to
listen to the concerns of the average chapel-attending Mormon who
doesn’t want to raise a stink but has some problems with the Church.
The more they remain disconnected from their parishioners; the more
these issues will fester. The longer everything we’ve discussed since
this podcast started in November of 2014 isn’t addressed, the more the
Church will lose in membership and tithing revenue, and the more
desperate it will become. Sure, it can sustain a loss of
$160,000,000/year in tithing for decades, but that won’t always be the
case.

Whether the Church wants to admit it or not, they’re where the RLDS
church was at the end of the 1990s with one powerful crucial difference,
the ubiquity of information available on the internet. Sure, you can ask
the youth to go on a week-long social media fast during PRIDE week, but
that only exhibits just how disconnected the leadership really is. The
Church is on the brink of crisis and the leadership refuses to
acknowledge that fact. If history is any indicator of the future, a
major fracturing is coming and dozens of schism sects will emerge from
the ashes of this monolith burning in the night sky. Millions of members
will break off and devote their time, energy, and tithing funds to other
causes upon finding familiar voices and experiences in online groups. A
great reconciliation is nigh and all the lying about scripture, history,
and current membership numbers and this great shadow in which the Church
operates its hundreds of companies with absolutely zero financial
oversight will come to a breaking point. Subjugated ethnicities will
flee, millennials and all subsequent generations will continue to
witness the vast chasm between the real world and the world in which the
leadership operates. The leadership will soon realize that new temples
have increasingly diminished returns as they squeeze blood from a turnip
in demographics with no spare tithing to consecrate. Historical
inaccuracies and white-washed truths will continue to pile up and
eventually topple down on the ignorant masses as a new wave of secular
interest in real Mormon history comes to fruition. Religion, and
Mormonism specifically, is a cancer on humanity. It’s a parasite you can
never kill and it will only divide, evolve, and conquer in new forms
until the harsh treatment of skepticism starves it into impotency and
relegates it to its rightful place in the annals of forgotten religions
of antiquity. When this happens, it’ll never be too soon.

Through all this that the future may hold, we’ll be hitting your
favorite podcatcher every week. So, stay tuned, Mormonism is getting
really fun as of late.

B2CBreak

God awful movies Joseph Smith prophet of the restoration

I want to give everybody an update on our launch of the new and improved
Glass Box Podcast. But before doing so, I’ll qualify what I’m about to
say by reading a brief listener email from Luke.

“I enjoy the guests you have on.   
  
I think it would be good for you to separate your content into history
episodes and guest interview episodes. I'm too tired to explain why I
think that, but at least now the idea is in your head so you can think
for yourself.”

This is important feedback and consistent with a number of similar
messages I’ve received for years now. Naked Mormonism initially set out
to tell a serialized history of Mormonism, but there are so many other
issues related to Mormonism that pique my interest and I feel like
deserve my attention and air time. For a long time, we did just that
with regular episodes and special edition episodes, but that became too
cumbersome. Naked Mormonism has now diversified so much that a
serialized history is only half of every episode and the other half
covers interviews and current events related to Mormonism, and sometimes
not even Mormon related at all. Diversity is good to a certain extent,
but not when it completely dilutes the initial vision to a point that
the serial Mormon history podcast becomes something other than just
that.

To bring in another point, I’ve been working for quite some time to
reboot the Glass Box Podcast with my soon-to-be cohost Braden. We
recorded a bunch of audio and made some of it available for patrons to
preview before the launch. We had an initial idea for the podcast that
it would be just reading through deep Mormon doctrine with our
commentary. The feedback from people listening to those rough draft
episodes was simply non-existent, which means we need to create
something listenable for people to want to listen to, instead of just
what we want to talk about.

A solution exists here as a great opportunity, but it requires that I
sincerely ask all of you listeners for a bit of patience for this all to
work out. We’re going to migrate all the segments I’ve debuted on Naked
Mormonism over to Glass Box Podcast, including all the backlogged
interviews I have from awesome people which don’t relate to Mormonism
whatsoever. That means that the Mormon Leaks Minute, the Angels Trumpet,
and any interviews, which aren’t specifically Mormon history, will all
be airing on Glass Box Podcast once we launch. We’ve set a launch date
for July 3<sup>rd</sup> airing semi-weekly after that. We want to start
slow and we’ve put a lot of time into recording and scrapping segments
and ideas that don’t quite make the cut and we hope you’ll all enjoy the
final product.

That means that any interviews you hear on Naked Mormonism from now on
will be just strictly about Mormon history, often tied in to our
historical timeline, and moving forward the majority of air time will be
devoted to serialized Mormon history as I set out to create from day 1
back in November of 2014.

And really, with how much Naked Mormonism has diversified, I’m already
putting in two shows worth of work in coordinating other segments and
guest interviews, so why not just take that next step forward and
actually make another podcast in order to keep the mission of Naked
Mormonism pure and intact as serialized and accessible Mormon history
and have separate outlet available for other issues that are important
but aren’t Mormon history. In my mind it seems like the best of both
worlds and Braden and I are really excited to get this project online
and to hear your feedback on the hours we’re putting in to make this
happen.

I’ll keep bugging you guys about it until the launch on July
3<sup>rd</sup>. We hope that the new podcast format will create a new
platform to allow for the diversity of topics which interest Braden and
myself and distill Naked Mormonism into the serialized history it’s been
all along.
