---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 120 – Bennett LOCA'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-120-bennett-loca/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-120-bennett-loca
category: History
date: 2018-09-14 07:09:32 +0000
---

Ep 120 -- Bennett LOCA

On this episode, the Sangamo Journal compiles a massive expose of Joe
Smith and the Mormons in preparation for Bennett's serial expose
letters. We set the stage by reading a few letter exchanges between Jo
and Governor Carlin of Illinois, in a bid to gain total protection from
Missouri "persecution". Carlin's advice? "Run"! We conclude with reading
a number of articles published prior to Bennett's actual expose which
provides a window into Illinois politics circa 1842.

Links:

Visit this week's sponsor and use promo code "Naked":
<https://49dollarsites.com/>

Sangamo Journal July 8, 1842\
<https://archive.org/stream/039SJO18420729001/039-SJO-1842-07-08-001#page/n1>

JS Letterbook June-July 1842\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#full-transcript>

History of Illinois by Governor Thomas Ford\
<https://archive.org/stream/ahistoryillinoi00shiegoog#page/n266>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

49dollarsites.com

All eyes turned towards the Kingdom on the Mississippi.

July 8, 1842, something which altered Mormon history forever happened.
The first of Wreck-it Bennett's expose letters was published in the
Sangamo Journal. Bennett left the church and office of Mayor of Nauvoo
in late May and spent most of June exchanging letters and collecting
statements. Historians forever should be thankful for the incredible
wealth of data collected during that time. It proved invaluable in
understanding aspects of Nauvoo history that were never recorded by the
leaders in the Church initially and would have been lost to history had
he not collected all of it. If you're a supporter of the show over on
patreon.com/nakedmormonism you get the audiobook version of his massive
expose with my commentary peppered in. We just finished Chapter 1 this
week and next week we break into chapter 2 when he gets into his history
of Joseph Smith. It's fascinating to say the least.

For the most part, the rest of the country, outside Illinois, Ohio, and
Missouri, had long regarded Mormonism as a wacky and deluded religious
sect, persecuted by the Missouri government, but altogether harmless.
However, there were some red flags cropping up here and there that maybe
there was something more to them. The Sangamo Journal had been covering
Joseph Smith and the Mormons for a couple years. Initially they started
out largely friendly, being a Whig paper and the Mormons representing an
unclaimed voting bloc. But, as Mormonism continued to grow and flourish
in Nauvoo, the Sangamo Journal started to look more like the Warsaw
Signal in its antagonisms of Jo Smith and the Mormonites. It was near
the end of 1841 and beginning of 1842 where the shift really began to
happen.

Here's a sympathetic article from June 1841 when Jo was trying to get
\$1.2 mn from the government for the Mormons having been chased from
Missouri.

"The last Register has a long article against the Mormons; not in direct
terms, it is true, but still in language that cannot be misunderstood.
If not, why does that paper attack Mr. Syuart for being willing to do
them an act of injustice. The Mormons have been driven from Missouri and
under such circumstances that they thought it their duty to make
application to Congress for redress. They are consitituents of Mr.
Stuart who was bound, as their Representative to prefer their claims
before Congress. Yet for doing this plain act of duty, the Register
reads him a lecture. That paper says, \"Let Mr. Stuart beware that he
does not dig a pit for himself to fall into.\" Is Mr. Stuart to dig a
pit for himself by doing a simple act of justice to a portion of his
constituents?"

Quite friendly and defensive of the plight of the Mormon refugees.
Here's January, 1842 after Jo had done some political maneuvering
unfavorable to the Whig politicians in the 1841 election cycle, the
Sangamo's tone is a bit different.

"CITIZENS OF ILLINOIS \-- READ AND CONSIDER!

The freedom of our fathers obtained for our bodies is worthless, nothing
to the emancipation given by them to the soul, in that most sacred
instrument \-- the Declaration of Independence! If we are justly
jealous, therefore, of our rights as citizens, and the freedom of our
bodies, as won by the blood of our fathers, how much more jealous should
we be of the rights of conscience and freedom of the soul, \-- that
pearl above all price \-- which they have left us as a legacy! \
\
With such ideas as these, the citizens of Illinois have opened their
arms to the sect called MORMONS in their hour of distress. They have
wept for the wrongs which they had undergone in Missouri, and have
shielded and guarded them until they are now numerous and fearless of
danger. God grant them the sense to shun a comparison with the asp of
the fables. This fable may be shortly told for their advantage. A
countryman, upon a cold winter day saw an asp, a very poisonous snake,
lying torpid with cold, by the road side, and in the simple kindness of
his heart, he lifted it up and took it home \-- where he laid it before
the fire to recover; and with his wife and children kindly rejoiced in
seeing life returning to the snake. After the heat had sufficiently
acted upon the asp, it raised its head, and instead of thanks to its
benefactor, began hissing and curling itself up preparatory to a deadly
attack upon the former; who, seeing its intent and aim, destroyed
it! The moral is perceptible, and needs no words of explanation. \
\
Why have we written the above? and why do we warn our harmless brothers
of Nauvoo? Simply for this: \-- though we have no objection that they
should act individually and independently, as their conscience dictates,
yet when they attempt to join the civil power with the religious they
attempt to destroy our hard-earned birth-right of liberty of conscience,
and compel us to retaliate for the injury done."

The Sangamo Journal's perspective of the Mormons was a perfect outlet
for Bennett's expose to be published. It was out of Springfield,
Illinois, capitol of Illinois and roughly the size of Chicago in
mid-1842 with nationwide readership. They had a platform big enough and
a sympathetic audience whose opinions of the Mormons had largely been
shaped by articles printed throughout 1842 about the Mormons which grew
more scathing as the year progressed in a crucial Governor election year
and Jo's political power waxed critical.

They landed the contract with Bennett to begin publishing his letters
exposing the Mormons. Bennett quickly rose to social prominence and
began riding the public lecture circuit to packed churches, public
meetinghouses, and Masonic halls all over Pennsylvania, Massachusetts,
New York, and, of course, Illinois. Anywhere that would organize a
gathering to hear a lecture on the deluded religious fanatics known as
the Mormons, Bennett would travel hundreds of miles to present his
findings.

The first article that published his expose came out on July 8, 1842,
printed alongside a number of other articles sharply critical of Jo and
the Mormons. Let's dive into the entire issue of the Sangamo Journal,
but before we do, we need to set the stage of the political and cultural
climate that brought this article to fruition.

The soon-to-be-elected Governor of Illinois, Thomas Ford, wrote his
History of Illinois. He was one of the most active lawyers and
politicians in the state, boasting he attended every state legislature
session from 1825 to 47 when he left politics and died 3 years later.
His history of Illinois, published posthumously, provides important
political and social commentary as a contemporary source of Nauvoo
Mormonism from an authoritative source who saw what happened from the
inside and outside of Nauvoo politics. He wasn't yet on Jo and the
Mormons radar until mid-1842, but he won the November election that
year, largely due to the Mormons, and became the new Governor
representing Nauvoo and the Mormons. Ford truly illustrates just how
much power Jo wielded in Nauvoo and the entire state of Illinois. Here
are a few select passages from his book, you'll find it on archive.org
in the show notes.

"In this state of the case Dr. John C. Bennett presented himself at the
seat of government as the agent of the Mormons. This Bennett was
probably the greatest scamp in the western country. I have made
particular enquiries concerning him, and have traced him in several
places in which he had lived before he had joined the Mormons in Ohio,
Indiana and Illinois, and he was everywhere accounted the same
debauched, unprincipled and profligate character. He was a man of some
little talent, and then had the confidence of the Mormons, and
particularly that of their leaders. He came as the agent of that people,
to solicit a city charter; a charter for a military legion; and for
various other purposes. This person addressed himself to Mr. Little, the
whig senator from Hancock, and to Mr. Douglass, the democratic secretary
of State, who both entered heartily into his views and projects. Bennett
managed matters well for his constituents. He flattered both sides with
the hope of Mormon favor; and both sides expected to receive their
votes."

History can be a great way of understanding what the future can possibly
hold. Ford goes on to illustrate the folly and unintended consequences
of pushing through government bills and charters without everybody
reading and comprehending the matters and ramifications contained in
said bills and charters. The Nauvoo charter was passed through without a
single person reading it top to bottom and he remarks "the same
universal zeal in its favor was manifested here which had been so
conspicuously displayed in the Senate."

And for the unintended consequences of the Nauvoo Charter being passed
so hastily through the Illinois government at the behest of Wreck-it
Bennett, he says:

"This seemed to give them power to pass ordinances in violation of the
*laws* of the State, and to erect a system of government for themselves.
This charter also established a mayor's court with exclusive
jurisdiction of all cases arising under the city ordinances, subject to
an appeal to the municipal court.... Thus it was proposed to
re-establish for the Mormons a government within a government, a
legislature with power to pass ordinances at war with the laws of the
State; courts to execute them with but little dependence upon the
constitutional judiciary; and a military force at their own command, to
be governed by its own by-laws and ordinances, and subject to no State
authority but that of the Governor. It must be acknowledged that these
charters were unheard-of, and anti-republican in many particulars; and
capable of infinite abuse by a people disposed to abuse them. The powers
conferred were expressed in language at once ambiguous and undefined; as
if on purpose to allow of misconstruction. The great law of the
separation of the powers of government was wholly disregarded."

Why is this relevant? The Mormons had total and complete theocratic
power in Nauvoo and Jo stood at the top of the empire. That is simply
terrifying for so many reasons. He wasn't beholden to any civil
authorities, had his own army, and was truly bullet-proof legally
speaking.... As long as he was in Nauvoo. His power didn't extend beyond
the city limits and it wasn't actually bullet-proof so much as just
slightly bullet-resistant.

From the Mormons side of the equation, Jo was still leveraging the
trauma the Mormons had experienced in Missouri to build up the
persecution narrative. The Missourians were the common enemy and just
trying to kill the prophet at all times. Every time he was arrested, it
wasn't a legal posse of constables executing a warrant under authority
from the government, it was the Missourians kidnapping Jo to kill him
under the guise of lawful proceedings. Ford captures the collective mind
of the Mormons in talking about Jo's 1841 arrest where Bennett as Master
in Chancery, along with Justice Stephen A. Douglass, granted the writ of
habeas corpus. After that he says this:

"The Mormons anticipated a further demand from Missouri, and a further
writ from the governor of this State, for the arrest of their prophet
and leaders. They professed to believe that the public mind in Missouri
was so prejudiced against them, that a fair trial there was out of the
question, and that if their leaders were taken to Missouri for trial,
and not convicted upon evidence, they would be murdered by a mob before
they could get out of the State. Some mode of permanent protection,
therefore, against the demands of Missouri, became a matter of vital
importance; and they set their ingenuity to work to devise a scheme of
protection, by means of their own city ordinances, to be executed by
their own municipal court."

The persecution narrative was very successful in banding the Mormons
together. Eventually it wasn't just Missourians, but all mobocrats. That
became the buzzword Jo used to instill fear in the minds of thousands of
people, retraumatize them by recounting the persecution they'd suffered
in Missouri at the hands of the mobocrats, and create the idea of a
cohesive balkanized group against a common enemy.

From the State's perspective, Joseph Smith was still a fugitive. He'd
been imprisoned awaiting a jury trial on charges of arson, robbery, and
treason against the United States. His conduct in Missouri rightfully
earned him a one-way ticket to the gallows should he be captured by the
Missouri state militia and taken to Missouri to face the law. That's
just facts. Jo broke the law by committing offenses deserving of the
death penalty, and he escaped the custody of the state. All of that
transpired before the collective opinion of the rest of the country
understood that Jo had commanded his destroying angel to assassinate an
ex-governor who was running for Missouri State Senate at the time.

The clever little plan they devised was to expand the power of the
issuance of habeas corpus. They made it so any person arrested in Nauvoo
under authority from any government body of any state and even the
largely impotent federal government, needed to be approved by the Nauvoo
municipal court.

"The charter intended to give the jurisdiction only in cases where
imprisonment was a consequence of the breach of some ordinance. But it
was interpreted by the Mormons to authorize the enlargement and
extension of the jurisdiction of the court, by ordinance. This ordinance
will figure very largely in the proceedings of the Mormons hereafter."

And it did. Jo was a big player. His letter book on Joseph Smith Papers
throughout 1839-44 almost includes more letters to politicians and
dignitaries than fellow leaders in the church. He'd curried favor with
many politicians who were salivating to get thousands of votes from the
Mormon bloc.

Mormonism, and opposition to it, truly was one of the few driving
political forces in Illinois in the early 1840s. That sets the political
landscape for the rest of what we're reading today to set the stage for
the Bennett expose meltdown. Jo tried to get ahead of this coming
firestorm by smearing Bennett's name. He did that by leveraging his
political connections with a few letters to and from Governor Carlin.
Nothing could stop what was about to happen, Jo could just try to brace
for impact. The first relevant letter was sent on June 24, 1842.

"Dr. Sir

It becomes my duty to lay before you some facts relative to the conduct
of our Major General [John C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#8181570757497997783): which
have been proven beyond the possibility of dispute, and which he
himself has admitted to be true, in my presence.

It is evident that his general character is that of an adulterer of the
worst kind, and although he has a wife and Children living,
circumstances which have transpired
in [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#14029324549829621638),
have proven to a demonstration that he cares not whose character is
disgraced whose honor is destroyed nor who suffers so that his lustful
appetite may be gratified and further he cares not how many, nor how
abominable the falsehood he has to make use of to accomplish his wicked
purposes, even should it be that he brings disgrace upon a whole
community.

Some time ago, it having been reported to me that some of the most
aggravating cases of adultery had been committed upon some previously
respectable females in
our [City](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#3061794301293002425),
I took proper measures to ascertain the truth of the report, and was
soon enabled to bring sufficient witnesses before proper Authority to
establish the following facts, More than twelve months
ago [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#16548636188274486183) went
to a Lady in
the [City](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#13126093228946995271) and
began to teach her that promiscuous intercourse between the sexes was
lawful and no harm in it, and requested the privilege of gratifying his
passions but she refused in the strongest terms saying that it was very
wrong to do so, and it would bring a disgrace on the Church Finding this
argument ineffectual he told her that men in higher standing in the
church than himself not only sanctioned but practised the same deeds,
and in order to finish the controversy said and affirmed that I both
taught and acted in \[p. 233\] the same manner, but publicly proclaimed
against it in consequence of the prejudace of the people and fear of
trouble in my own house. By this means he accomplished his designs, he
seduced a respectable female with lying and subjected her to public
infamy and disgrace.

Not contented with what he had already done he made the attempt on
others and by using the same language seduced them also.

about the early part of July 1841 I received a letter
from [Pittsburgh](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#16218070544042965898) Pa In
it was contained information setting forth that
said [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#3961270309216309662) had
a wife and two or three children then living. This I red to him and he
acknowledged it was true

A very short time after this he attempted to destroy himself by taking
poison but being discovered before it had taken sufficient affect, and
proper antidotes administered he again recovered."

The language is a bit misleading, primarily that it's absolutely insane
to claim that Bennett tried to kill himself. His expose reveals some
disturbing details of what happened 3 days after Jo sent this letter
stating Bennett had tried to kill himself. Nauvoo was a dangerous place
for any apostates, but one of such a high caliber as Wreck-it Bennett,
his time was limited in town. The Danites took to a new pastime of
following Bennett around ominously.

"In my communication to the Sangamo Journal of the 27^th^ June, 1842, I
stated that I had been threatened with death by the Holy Joe and his
Danite band of murderers, in case I *dare make any disclosures*
prejudicial to that polluted mass of corruption, iniquity, and
fraud,\--that King of Imposters, the holy and immaculate Joe
Smith;\--and in my communication of July 2d, I stated that, when on my
journey to Springfield, on my arrival in Carthage, I found, as all the
citizens well know, that I was followed by Mr. O. P. Rockwell, a Danite,
who, on his arrival late in the night, made strict inquiries as to where
I was. His ostensible business was to *put a letter in the post-office!*
Bah!! I was prepared for the gentleman, and he approached me not; but
another swift rider, Captain John D. Parker, another Danite, followed me
to Springfield, to *carry a letter to Dr. Helm! Ah!* Ha!! BAH!!! I told
Captain Parker that I was aware of his object, but I feared him not. At
Virginia, in Cass county, on my returne, Parker met me again, and I
called the attention of the stage-driver to him, who, thereupon, put two
additional balls into his pistol, and observed to me that he was then
ready for him or any other person having the same object in view. On the
23d of June, 1842, the Holy Prophet, in an article over his own name,
published in "The (Nauvoo) Wasp" of June 25^th^, threatened me with the
VENGEANCE OF THE LORD, in the following language: "Unless he \[Bennett\]
is determined to bring SUDDEN DESTRUCTION upon himself FROM THE HAND OF
THE ALMIGHTY, \[the *Destroying Angel,*\] he will be *silent.*"

In order to fulfil this prediction, on the evening of the 29^th^ of
June, the Destroying Angel approached my boarding-house, (General
Robinson's,) in Nauvoo, with their carriage wheels wrapped with
blankets, and their horses' feet muffled with cloths, to prevent noise,
about ten o'clock, for the purpose of conveying me off for "*sudden
destruction,"* or assassination, so as to make me I "*silent*" and thus
prevent disclosures. Dead men tell no tales! But, as I had an intimation
of the matter in the afternoon, I borrowed two pistols of General
Robinson, and one of Mr. Hunter, a merchant, and loaded them with slugs.
Besides these, I had two good Bowie-knives, and some of my friends were,
likewise, well armed,\--well prepared to give the Angel a warm
reception. So, after prowling around the house (the lights in which were
extinguished) for some time, the "*hand of the Almighty*" withdrew! On
the 6^th^ of July, Mr. Jotham Clark told me in Carthage, in the presence
of Dr. Thomas L. Barnes and Mr. Jonas Hobart, that he, having business
near there, came into town to tell me that the Mormons had *threatened
my life*, and warned me to be on my guard. This is the treatment
dissenters receive when they come out of the *modern Babylon,* the
*mother of harlots*, by the SAINTS OF THE LAST DAYS."

The Danites continued to follow Bennett around. George Miller, on behalf
of Jo, sent a letter to Governor Reynolds of Missouri, who'd replaced
Lilburn Boggs in 1840. Missourians hated the Mormons, Bennett would find
an audience ready to hear of the depraved character of Joe Smith in the
state. The letter takes on a tone of friendship with the citizens of
Missouri, because, of course, the Mormons only wanted *friendship* with
Missouri since they were driven from the state 3 years prior. This
letter documents a remarkable shift in tone from how the Mormons had
previously been dealing with Missourians. The content of this letter is
only accurate if you don't take into consideration all the sermons
against Missouri mobocrats and the violent rhetoric preached against the
Missourians since settlement in Nauvoo.

"The object of this communication is therefore to inform you of the true
character of said [John C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#6663333720735605010),
that he may not injure the innocent, by gaining credence with you or
those over whom
your [Excellency](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#6040311778017760478) is
placed to govern. We have learned from respectable sources that
said [John Cook
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#13497855925008963627) has
entered into a conspiracy with some of the citizens of
your [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#18156272740230245583),
to bring a mob upon us, and thereby disturb our peaceful vocations of
life, and destroy, and drive us from our homes, and firesides. Believing
that
your [excellency](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#9181473043101045418) cannot
be influenced by the popular prejudice, almost every where entertained
against us, on account of our peculiar religious tenets; I am the more
free to write to you without reserve; knowing that the hightoned, and
honorable men of the earth, will not be easily caried away by popular
opinion or vulgar prejudice; but will always be found on the side of the
Law abiding, portion of Community; and will suppress so far as in them
lies, every movement that tends to abridge the rights, or mar the peace
and happiness of any portion of the citizens of our Common Country. I
have resided in
this [City](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#18047418774094603445) near
three years, and attached myself to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints, soon after their Location here; and have had a good
opportunity of learning the feelings of the Leading members of the said
church, in reguard to the Citizens
of [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#12913901558805181444), which
are of the most friendly nature; ever desiring to live in peace, and
cultivate friendship with all of the Citizens of
your [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#3913868481007513378) as
also all the States, and all mankind generally; it being a principle of
our faith, to Cultivate friendship and live in peace with all mankind;
and if Dr [John Cook
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#13735308983913813113),
or any other person, may conspire with citizens of
your [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#8887942899382508980),
to bring upon us \[p. 236\] mob voilence, we confide in you as one who
will under all circumstances interpose the strong arm of the Law, in the
suppression of conspiricy conspiricies or mobs, or any other violation
of Law. as citizens of the [united
States](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#10343394910055467776) we
claim the protection of the several States and the [United
States](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#13979190372185091869)in
all our constitutional rights, and having learned something of your
character we the more confidently expect your protection, against all
lawless agressions, by any of the citizens of
your [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#9143450423137175743)."

Look, we've had our differences and a lot of people are saying that a
Danite was sent to shoot your predecessor, Boggs, but that Bennett guy
is working to conspire against us with citizens of your state,
sooooooo.... Can you help us out by prosecuting anybody who tries to
conspire with him? We just ask sincerely for your protection and you
forget everything that's happened between us for the past 5 years and
all the evaded arrests and violent rhetoric. We kewl bro? Yeah... we
kewl....

Some confusion must have existed in the mind of Governor Carlin of
Illinois after Jo sent his first communication and a personal meeting
was necessary. However, Jo was trying to stay as concealed as possible
for fear of his life, so he sent his best emissary. I'm reading a little
before this meeting out of Mormon Enigma p.121 to put the information
into better context.

"Joseph announced that ex-Governor Lilburn Boggs of Missouri had been
shot and seriously wounded. Boggs had made a number of enemies but none
were stronger or more bitter than the Mormons. Thus the Missourians, who
suspected the Mormons---and Joseph Smith in particular---of being
responsible for the attack, renewed their efforts to arrest Joseph. Talk
of extradition was everywhere in Nauvoo. The week after Frederick
\[Smith\]'s sixth birthday, the child announced to all the house at
breakfast that he had a dream and "the Missourians had got their heads
knocked off."

In addition, John C. Bennett's exposes and emotional rhetoric fueled
anti-Mormon feelings in Illinois. Joseph wrote Illinois Governor Thomas
Carlin a letter responding to Bennett's accusations and alerting the
governor to the Missouri threats. Determined to help Joseph, Emma took
Eliza R. Snow and Amanda Barns Smith with her to Quincy to see Carlin in
July. Amanda Smith had lost her first husband and a son at the Haun's
Mill massacre, while another son had had his hip shot away. Emma
probably invited her to describe the Missouri mobs. Thomas Carlin
greeted the women cordially and listened to Emma plead Joseph's case.
With assurance and self-confidence, she explained that she did not ask
for Joseph's safety alone, but observed that if Joseph's freedom was
endangered by unlawful arrests and attempts were made on his life while
incarcerated in Missouri, then hundreds of Mormon lives were equally
threatened. Emma assured him that Joseph had not participated in the
attempted assassination of Governor Boggs. When Carlin said he would not
advise Joseph to trust himself to Missouri, Emma challenged him to
protect Joseph by invoking the laws of Illinois and secured his
statement that he would use full legal means to protect the Mormons. Of
the meeting Eliza commented in her journal, "It remains for time and
circumstance to prove the sincerity of his professions.""

After the women met with Carlin, Jo and Governor Carlin exchanged
letters again. Carlin decided to side with Jo and believe that Bennett
was the depraved scoundrel Jo claimed him to be in the previous letter.
The meeting taken with Emma must have had an influence on Carlin as
well, but the exact contents of that meeting aren't known. Here's the
letter from Gov. Carlin to Jo dated June 30^th^, 1842:

"Dear Sir

I have received by the last mail your letter of the 24th. instant; in
which you have thought proper to give me a statement of Charges against
the Conduct, and Character, of General. [John C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#17435012859019880435).
I can say that I regret that any individual should so far disregard his
obligations to his God, and to his fellow man, as to Condesend to the
Commission of the Crimes alledged in your letter to have been
perpetrated by [General
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#18070375609205170299).
It is however in accordance with representations of his Character, made
to me more than two years since, and which I then felt Constrained to
believe were true, since which time I have desired to have as little
intercourse with him as possible. No resignation of his Commission as
Mgr. General of the Nauvoo legion has reached me, some weeks since I red
a short note from him stating that you had reason to believe that a
conspiracy was getting up in the State
of [Mo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#8056983816920917669),
for the purpose of mob\[b\]ing the Mormons
at [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#1658970176293987105),
and Kidnapping you, and taking you to
that [state](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#18088733497763537178),
and requested to be informed in case of such Mob, whether you would be
protected by the authorities of
this [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#2376035080673005281)
&c, to which I replied that as all men were held amenable to the laws,
so in like manner the rights of all would be protected, and the dignity
of
the [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#4614224481283921982) maintained,
to the letter of the Constitution and Laws; the above is in substance
the contents of his note to me and my reply to him; having destroyed his
Letter, as I considered it of no use should it be retained..."

But Carlin wasn't done. Bennett may have been a terrible person and he'd
heard of Bennett's reputation a few months before he joined the Mormons
in Nauvoo in late 1840, but the language Carlin used in the letter was
very calculated. He said "all men were held amenable to the laws". What
could that mean? Was he saying Bennett conspiring against the Mormons
was something he'd be held legally accountable for, or was he saying to
Jo that ALL men, including Jo, are held accountable to the law for any
misconduct? The rest of his letter makes his position clear as mud.
However, it becomes very clear that Carlin was aware of the rhetoric Jo
was spewing was no longer idle rhetoric as Boggs had suffered the wrath
of some unknown assassin:

"You state that you have heard that I have of late entertained
unfavourable feelings towards you (the mormons) as a people, and
especially so with regard to your self &c. &c. If this should be true,
you would be pleased to know from me the reasons--- of such hostile
feelings.

In reply I can in truth say that I do not entertain nor cherish,
hostile or revengeful, feelings, towards any man or set of men on Earth,
but that I may have used strong expressions in reference to yourself, at
times--- when my indignation has been some what aroused, by repeated
adminitions of my friends, (both before and, since the attempt to
assassinate [ex Gov. \[Lilburn W.\]
Boggs](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#13660016547171811510)) to
be upon my guard, that you had prophesied---
that [Boggs](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#1821015050341245999) should
die a violent death,--- and that I should die in a ditch, all this
however if true, I looked upon as idle boasting until since the
assassination
of [Boggs](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#3053820817581167033)---
and even since then in reference to myself, I cannot view it in any
other light, because what ever your feelings may have been
towards [Boggs](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#5598404430406870707);
the \[p. 238\] mere discharge of an official duty on my part, enjoined
upon me by the constitution and laws, of
this [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#12233359852854032720),
and of the [United
States](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#9684993159191413083) Could
not possibley engender feelings of such deep malignity. Be assured
that this matter gives me no uneaseness, nor would the subject now have
been mentioned, had you not requested a reply to your enquiries I have
seen your denial published in the wasp of the prediction attributed to
you, of the death (or assassination) of [Gov
Boggs](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#11742559108287599509),
be that true or false, nothing has Contributed more towards fixing the
belief upon the public mind, that you had made such prediction, than the
repeated statements of a portion of your followers, that the manner of
his death had been revealed to you--- and their exultation that it must
needs be fulfilled.

In reference to your request to be advised, how you should act in Case a
mob should Come upon you, I should feel very much at a loss to recommend
any corse for you to adopt, other than a resort to the first law of
nature viz.--- to defend your own rights, because were I to advise a
quiet submission on your part, I could not expect that you would fold
your arms, and silently look on, whilst those rights were violated, and
outraged, as long as you have the power to protect them.

I however have not the most distant thought that there exists at
present, any real cause for the apprehension of a mob Coming upon you,
otherwise I should feel it my duty to endeavor to arrest it."

Carlin made it clear enough that if a mob came to arrest or "kidnap" Jo,
it would be too late for the Governor to react. These fears were
justified. Unrest existed all around. To complicate matters further, a
zombie rose from the grave which only blew more fuel into the fire for
the Mormon leadership while they were trying to deal with the Bennett
scandal.

"Lilburn W. Boggs, who being duly sworn doth depose and say that on the
night of the 6^th^ day of May \[1842\], while sitting in his
dwelling,... he was shot with intent to kill, and that his life was
despaired of for several days, and that he believes and has good reason
to believe from evidence and information now in his possession, that O.
P. Rockwell,... is the person who shot him... and the said deponent
hereby applies to the Governor of the State of Illinois, to deliver the
said O. P. Rockwell to some person authorized to receive him and convey
him to the county aforesaid, there to be dealt with according to law."

I'm of the opinion that Port shot Boggs. It's a matter of conjecture
that will never be resolved, but there's location, circumstance,
opportunity, and motive which allow Port to be the assailant. Whether or
not Port actually pulled the trigger or not doesn't matter, because
everybody *believed* he did, that's what really matters. Governor Carlin
of Illinois couldn't simply stand idly by with somebody living in his
state who tried to assassinate a high-profile politician during his
senatorial election campaign. Carlin drafted the writ of arrest for
Porter, likely without Jo knowing at this time, so Illinois constables
could bring him into custody and extradite him to the Missouri
government.

Jo took the language in Carlin's letter to mean he'd be kept safe from
the Missouri constables who'd inevitably come into Nauvoo to arrest him,
both for the previous charges, and for conspiracy to assassinate an
elected official. Jo's rap sheet was getting longer every year and with
Boggs's attempted murder added to the list, it was reaching critical
mass. But, no interstate police force existed in the United States at
this time, that would take prohibition, the great depression, and career
criminal bank robbers to create. Missouri government officials only had
jurisdiction in Illinois on limited orders, but the new ordinance
described by soon-to-be Governor Ford earlier made it so any arrest made
in Nauvoo would need to pass through the Nauvoo court system first.
We'll get there in a minute.

In response to Carlin's letter and the protectionism Jo read into the
language, Jo quickly penned a letter to Governor Carlin thanking him for
his hospitality in receiving Emma to the meeting. The protection Jo was
evidently assuming was never explicitly stated by Carlin. He was a
politician, his language can be interpreted multiple ways.

"Esteemed Sir,

Your favour of the 27th. inst. for Brevet Major Gen. [Wilson
Law](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#16450878869223221077) is before
me. I cannot let this opportunity pass without tendering to you
my Warmest thanks for the friendly treatment
my [Lady](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#10213255136941770318) as
well as those with her received at your hands during the late visit, and
also for the friendly feelings breathed forth in your letter.
Your [excellency](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#16923898458273178665) may
be assured that they are duly appreciated by me and shall ever be
reciprocated.

I am perfectly satisfied with regard to the subject under
consideration and with your remarks. I shall consider myself and our
citizens secure from harm under the broad canopy of the Law under your
administration, We look to you \[p. 239\] for protection in the event of
any voilence being used towards us knowing that our innocence with
reguard to all the accusations in circulation will be duly
evidenced before an enlightened public.

Any service we can do
the [State](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#9150728125974372067) at
any time will be cheerfully done, for our ambition is to be Serviceable
to
our [Country](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letterbook-2/238#14532014197386489541).

With sentiments of respect and esteem I remain your humble Servant

Joseph Smith"

Chaos continued to build.

Music transition

We'll get into that in a minute, but first, a word from our sponsor this
week, 49dollarsites.com

Hey everybody, have you been to the revamped nakedmormonismpodcast.com
website yet? It's really cool. I had a listener send a message asking if
I've done anything with the Lucy Mack Smith biographical sketches book.
I've used it a few times here and there, but when I read the most from
it was during our mother's day special episode a few months ago. Now, I
didn't remember what episode it was, just that it was an episode, so I
went to the website built by 49dollarsites.com and used the handy dandy
search bar to crawl the backlog and show notes, and boom, there it was.
I found the episode and other episodes where Lucy Macks biography was
included in the show notes all on one page. 49dollarsites built a robust
and functional site with search engine optimization. Not only could I
have used the search bar on the site, but I could have googled it and
the exact episode would have come up, the algorithms they use to
optimize search engine data are exactly what I need to increase google
search results. The traffic since the site was overhauled has increased
dramatically, it's super professional and built for usability. Even more
important than all of that, it works on mobile just as well as desktop,
which is more and more important with the way people use the internet.

If you need a website for yourself, a small business, to make a blog
that doesn't look like every other blog out there, 49dollarsites.com is
the way to get it. If you use promo code "Naked" you get a free upgrade
to the pro plan.

A standard plan gets you daily back-ups, hosting, professional
copywriting, access to stock images, unlimited updates, and they do all
of that with no start-up costs. 49dollarsites puts you in contact with
an expert web-building team that know what they're doing. My project
manager is super attentive and takes all the headache out of running a
website off my shoulders.

But, if you use that promo code "Naked" at checkout, you get everything
I said earlier plus google analytics, a photo gallery with sliders to
view them, google map integration, text animation, and a whole suite of
other features, all at the regular price.

So, go to 49dollarsites.com and enter promo code "Naked" to get a
professional website that will earn the respect you or your company need
to compete. Once again that's 49dollarsites.com enter promo code
"Naked". 49dollarsites, why have you waited this long?

Music transition

Bennett's first expose letters were published in the Sangamo Journal
July 8, 1842. His first letter was published among a number of other
salacious and inflammatory articles against the Mormons which didn't
come from Bennett explicitly. We're going to read through a bunch of it
today. Why? Because this article changed Mormonism forever. Not only
that, it changed Jo in ways we can't imagine for the remaining 2 years
of his life. This is an important issue of the newspaper, not only for
the content, but for the impact it had on society and the collective
psyche of the Mormons.

The Sangamo Journal was a Whig paper, whereas Thomas Ford was running as
the Democrat candidate for the office of Governor. The issue on July 8,
1842 takes plenty of opportunity to torpedo Ford and any other democrat
currying favor with the Mormons. The Sangamo Journal was trying to make
the Mormons a liability, but in 1842 they were a large enough population
to be counted as an asset instead.

"The Mormon plot and league, by which THOMAS FORD and JOHN MOORE hope to
be elected Governor and Lieut. Governor of Illinois:

Such has been the demand for that number of our paper containing the
evidence upon which we found the charge, that the leaders of the Van
Buren party of this State, have entered into a plot and league, to
obtain the votes of Joe Smith's subjects for their candidates for
Governor and Lieutenant Governor, that we feel it our duty to re-publish
the Documentary evidence in the case, and other facts, showing the
dangerous nature of this corrupt and scandalous coalition. And the first
acts of Incorporation, for the benefit of the Mormons, smuggled through
the Legislature *without reading*, by the leaders of the party."

It then goes on to detail a few points of the Nauvoo charter seen as
particularly egregious violations of the free republic of America,
making really solid points all along their deconstruction of the
charter. After that it goes on to print the growing political sway of Jo
and the Nauvoo Legion. It details how Stephen A. Douglass had visited
Nauvoo, reprinting a Times & Seasons article from May 1841 written,
presumably, by Jo.

"I had the honor of receiving a visti from the Hon. Stephen A. Douglass,
Justice of the Supreme Court and Judge of the Fifth Judicial Circuit of
the State of Illinois \* \* \* who addressed the assembly, and expressed
his satisfaction at what he had seen and heard respecting our people,
and took that opportunity of returning thanks to the citizens of Nauvoo
for conferring upon him the freedom of the city, stating that he was not
aware of rendering us any service of *sufficient* importance to deserve
such marked honor."

After that it details Jo's arrest the following month in 1841 and that
his writ of habeas corpus was heard by Stephen A. Douglass who
immediately granted the writ and let Jo go free. Had Douglass not
granted the writ, Jo would have remained in the custody of the Missouri
constables and been shipped off to Missouri to answer for all his
crimes. Douglass quite literally saved Jo's life by granting the writ.
It continues to assail Douglass's political flaccidness in opposing the
growing power of Jo and the Mormons when it came to appointing Bennett
as master in chancery and an issue between state funds going to the
Nauvoo Legion and fines being assessed against them. Thanks to Douglass
bending over backwards for Jo and the Mormons, any orders assessed
against the Nauvoo Legion for any matter needed to go through the Master
in Chancery, which was John C. Wreck-it Bennett, appointed to that
position by Douglass.

In commenting on Douglass's overt friendliness to the Mormons and
enshrining their will above the laws of the state and the country's
constitution, the Sangamo Journal reprints a Times & Seasons article
which was published in response to a Warsaw Signal article from June
1841.

"We can hardly find language to express our surprise and disapprobation
at the conduct of the editor of the Signal as manifested in that paper.
We had fondly hoped that the sentiments therein expressed would never
have dared to be uttered by any individual in this community in which we
reside, and we would ask the editor of the Signal what is the cause of
his hostility, of this sudden and unexpected ebullition of feeling, this
spirit of opposition and animosity? Whose rights have been disturbed?
Gen. Bennett has been appointed Master in Chancery by Judge Douglass;
and Gen. Bennett is a Mormon."

The Sangamo Journal comments on the implications and results of this
article by saying:

"The Times and Seasons is astonished that an editor "DARE" comment on
this transaction. We fear that it is dangerous for a man to speak or act
his sentiments in relation to Joe Smith.---If he does it, it is with the
mangled and bloody body of Gov. Boggs before his mind's eye---shot by an
assassin in his own house---in the bosom of his family---while
unconscious that he had an enemy in the world---which act has been
pronounced by high Mormon authority "A NOBLE DEED"!"

This issue of the Sangamo Journal continues to get even more
fascinating. Never in any single place have I seen such a masterful
articulation of Jo's political motives and endgames cobbled together on
a single piece of paper. After commenting on the exchange between Thomas
Sharp of the Warsaw Signal and the Times & Seasons, it continues to
puzzle together the real intent of the Mormons by reprinting a small
extract from Rigdon's July 4^th^ oration in 1838, which was the oration
that lit the powder keg that kicked off the Mormon's war with Missouri.

Then the Sangamo Journal prints an extract from the Book of Commandments
page 191 as follows.

"Wherefore I say unto you, that I have sent unto you my everlasting
covenant, (namely, the book of Mormon), even that which was from the
beginning, and that which I have promised I have so fulfilled, and the
Nations of the Earth *shall bow to it*; and if not of themselves, they
shall come down, for that which is now exalted of itself, shall be laid
low by power."

Make no mistake, the sentiment captured in that scripture passage has
never left the collective consciousness of the Mormon mindset. Plenty of
Mormons today sincerely believe the church will somehow rule the world
when Jesus comes back to reign. It had a slightly different connotation
in Jo's day than it has today, but the central idea that the Church will
be the sole governing authority post-apocalypse is still very much alive
to this day. To make the point of how such a revolution would take
place, the Sangamo Journal prints a few extracts from "Voice of Warning"
by P-cubed Parley Parker Pratt, this was the first Mormon missionary
tract. They print the following:

"Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all
that will hear, may. Prepare ye, prepare ye, for that which is to come,
for the Lord is nigh, and the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his
sword is sheathed in Heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of
the earth, that they that will not hear the voice of his servants,
neither give heed to the words of the Prophets and Apostles, shall be
cut off from among the people. Wherefore I have called upon the weak
things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the
nations by the power of my spirit; and their arm shall be my arm, and I
will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins,
and they shall fight manfully for me, and their enemies shall be under
their feet, and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and with the
fire of my indignation I will preserve them...

The Government of the United States, has been engaged for upwards of
seven years, in gathering the remnant of Joseph (the Indians) to the
very place where they will finally build the New Jerusalem, a city of
Zion, with the acquisition of the believing Gentiles, who will gather
with them from all the nations of the earth, and this gathering is
clearly predicted in the Book of Mormon, and the place appointed and the
time set for its fulfilment; and except the Gentiles repent of all their
abominations, and embrace the same covenant, (the Book of Mormon) and
come into the same place of gathering, they will soon be destroyed from
off the face of the land, as is written by Isaiah, "the nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish." And I will state as a
prophesy, that there will not be an unbelieving Gentile on the face of
this Continent fifty years from this date, (1838,) then the Book of
Mormons will have proved itself false."

Well, chalk up another failed Mormon prophecy, but the central focus
here is that the Gentiles will be taken over by the honest and upright
Mormons, unless they repent of their abominations. And, who determines
what is and is not abomination? Well, Joseph Smith, of course. Printing
that extract after a clip out of the July oration declaration of War by
Hingepin Rigdon really puts into context exactly what Jo and the Mormons
had in mind for the Union. But, one can't simply overthrow the
government and bring all Gentiles to repentance overnight, it takes
political maneuvering, which is illustrated in the next passage printed
in the Sangamo Journal, where Jo promises his votes to anybody who is a
friend of the Mormons, regardless of political party.

"Joe Smith's proclamation. State Gubernatorial Convention...

The Gubernatorial Convention of the State of Illinois, have nominated
Colonel Adam W. Snyder for Governor, and Colonel John Moore for Lt.
Governor of the State of Illinois---election to take place in August
next. Colonel Moore, like Judge \[Stephen A.\] Douglass, and Esq.
Warren, was an intimate friend of General Bennett long before that
gentleman became a member of our community; and General Bennett informs
us that no men were more efficient in assisting him to procure our
*chartered privileges* than were Colonel Snyder and Colonel
Moore.---They are sterling men, and friends of equal rights---opposed to
the oppressor's grasp, and the tyrant's rod. With such men at the head
of our State Government, we have nothing to fear...

Snyder and Moore are known to be our friends; their friendship is
vouched for by those whom we have tried. We will never be justly charged
with the sin of ingratitude---they HAVE served US---we WILL serve THEM.
-Joseph Smith"

The next article is titled "They can already dictate to the State of
Illinois." Bear with me as we read through this, I'm driving at a point
that will wrap this all together. It begins with reporting that the New
York Herald had been coopted by the Mormons and was printing articles
friendly to the Mormons under the guise of being critical. That
shouldn't surprise anybody, but the content that Jo had printed in the
Herald should surprise all of us in how brazen and unabashed it is
concerning the overthrow of the United States. This is an article
printed by an agency FRIENDLY to the Mormons. It's terrifying, and the
Sangamo Journal commentary afterwards is perfect.

"Highly important from the Mormon Empire---Wonderful progress of Joe
Smith---Spread of the Mormon Faith, and a new religious revolution at
hand.

It is very evident that the Mormons exhibit a remarkable degree of tact,
skill, shrewdness, energy and enthusiasm. The particular features of
their faith are nothing against their success. Do they believe their new
Bible, their VIRGIN REVELATION, their singular creed? If they do so with
enthusiasm and practice their shrewd precepts, the other sects will fall
before them. THIS IS CERTAIN---THIS IS HUMAN NATURE. In Illinois they
have shown how to acquire a vast influence, by holding the balance of
power between both parties. THEY CAN ALREADY DICTATE TO THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS, AND IF THEY PURSUE THE SAME POLICY IN OTHER STATES, WILL THEY
NOT SOON DICTATE TO CONGRESS AND DECIDE THE PRESIDENCY? In all matters
of public concernment, they act as one man, with one soul, one mind, and
one purpose. Their religious and moral principles bind them together
firmly.

Verily, verily, we are truly in the "latter days"---and we should not be
surprised to see that the Mormon religion is the REAL MILLENIUM already
commenced. One thing is certain. The Mormons are so constituted, that,
in these temperance times, THEY WILL SWALLOW UP ALL THE OTHER LUKEWARM
PROTESTANT SECTS---and the moral and religious world will be divided
between the Pope and the Catholics on one side, and Joe Smith and the
Mormons on the other. *The oyster is opening*, and will soon be *equally
divided*."

Here's the commentary from the editor of the Sangamo Journal, who viewed
this article with justifiable terror.

"The Herald says "*the Mormons can already dictate to the State of
Illinois!*" And are they not doing it? Has not Joe Smith issued a
Proclamation requiring his followers to vote for certain candidates for
Governor and Lieutenant Governor? The Herald calls the Mormon religion
"a *virgin revelation*, and that all "*other sects will fall before
it*." Precisely the same sentiment, though not the same words, was made
use of by Judge Douglass on the same subject. He said to J. M. Ruggles,
Esq. that "he believed there was as much true religion among them (the
Mormons) as any other church," and that "a new broom sweeps clean,"
Singular coincidence, indeed!\...

The next section of the same article is absolutely amazing. It was sent
to the Sangamo Journal by an unnamed officer of the U.S. Artillery.
After the letter the editor says "This letter requires no comments"
because it stand alone so well.

"Yesterday was a great day among the Mormons. Their Legion, to the
number of two thousand men, was paraded by Generals Smith, Bennett, and
others, and certainly made a very noble and imposing appearance. The
evolutions of the troops directed by Major General Bennett, would do
honor to any body of armed militia in any of the States, and
approximates very closely to our regular forces. WHAT DOES ALL THIS
MEAN? Why this exact discipline of the Mormon corps? Do THEY INTEND to
CONQUER MISSOURI, ILLINOIS, MEXICO? It is true they are part of the
militia of the State of Illinois, by the charter of their Legion, but
then there are no troops in the States like them in point of enthusiasm
and warlike aspect, yea warlike character. Before many years this Legion
will be twenty, and perhaps fifty thousand strong, and still augmenting.
A fearful host, filled with religious enthusiasm, and led on by
ambitious and talented officers, what may not be effected by them?
Perhaps the subversion of the constitution of the United States, and if
this be considered too great a task, foreign conquest will most
certainly follow. Mexico will fall into their hands,...

These Mormons are accumulating, like a snow-ball rolling down an
inclined plane, which in the end becomes an avalanche. *They are also
enrolling among their officers some of the first talent in the country,
by tittles or bribes,* IT DON'T *matter which*. They have appointed your
namesake, Capt. Bennett, late of the army of the United States,
Inspector General of their Legion, and he is commissioned as such by
Gov. Carlin. This gentleman is known to be well skilled in
fortification, gunnery, ordinance, castramentation, and military
engineering generally, and I am assured that *he is now under pay,
derived from the tithings of this warlike people.* I have seen *his
plans for fortifying Nauvoo, which are equal to any of Vauban's*.

I arrived here in cog on the 1^st^ inst., and from the great preparation
for the military parade, was induced to stay to see the turnout, which I
confess has astonished and filled me with fears for future consequences.
The Mormons, it is true, are now peaceable, but the lion is asleep. Take
care, and don't rouse him."

That's all we'll read out of the Sangamo Journal for today, we'll pick
up next week and really get into the meat of the July 8^th^ issue. So,
given everything read so far, what does it all mean? Mormonism wasn't a
church. It wasn't a religion. It wasn't a scheme contrived by a fraud to
make some money. It may have been those things at some point, but Nauvoo
Mormonism is a completely different beast. Jo spent more time on swaying
politics than he did preaching sermons. He was more occupied with letter
exchanges with politicians than church leaders.

This last weekend was a big event in Mormonism, Braden talk about it on
the latest Glass Box Podcast episode. Sam Young's excommunication
council, a court of love, as they call it. It was President Nelson's
94^th^ birthday, and Apostle Quentin L. Cook did a young adults Face to
Face event on Facebook from the Nauvoo Temple.

It's their latest stop in the Saints book tour, and it's very clearly a
pitch for the book, almost every answer has something about the new
book, usually coupled with, this is where you can find answers to that
question you just asked. Honestly, I hope people read Saints, the
Standard of Truth. What I've read so far leads me to conclude that it's
a great introduction to Mormon history. It contains facts about Joseph
Smith that millions of members don't have the first clue exist.

The Facebook event talked a bit about Joseph Smith's early life and they
threw the guest panel of historians a few hard-marshmallows about the
seer stones and polygamy. Every time they punted and said to read the
book, so it must be the new Standard of the Truth about Mormon History,
good thing it's free on the gospel library app! (on call) Uh, no, Mr.
Nelson, is it powered on? Okay, is the screen lit up? Okay, push the
power button, ... no that's the one with a straight up line and a circle
around it... Yeah, the big one. No, it's not on your keyboard, on the
box by the desk. Okay, good job. Now let's open Internet Explorer...

The thing is, any time conversations about Mormon history happen across
the believing divide, there's always a vast chasm that can rarely be
surmounted. Often times, the majority of those chapel-attending Mormons
haven't read the gospel topics essays, or even know the word
anachronism, right? There's a massive body of knowledge that needs to be
understood for Mormons to get to the level of mature faith, instead of
the naïve faith the church has indoctrinated them with. Which is why the
CES letter and Rough Stone Rolling are such popular resources when
people begin to question. There's an informational hurdle before
concluding that it's a fraud, but beyond it lies an absence of cognitive
dissonance. Where there used to be Mormon shelf now there's a
*book*shelf.

This Standard of Truth is going to have an impact on membership. The
Joseph Smith of that book is not friendly to a faltering testimony. If
that Jo scares you away from the church, there's no way you can handle
Jo after his world is broken by Wreck-it Bennett. Mormons aren't going
to like him when he's angry.

If Joseph Smith using magic and seer stones is a problem for a person's
testimony, what will Joseph translating Ancient Egyptian without knowing
the first thing about Egyptology do to that shaky foundation? If Joseph
Smith marrying 33 wives is hard for that person to wrestle with, what
goes through their minds when they learn how he acquired them? If Joseph
Smith gave a revelation that Zion will be built on the American
Continent, and a person hears about him giving a sermon that he'll
become a Muhammed unto this generation, how does that person go on to
bear their testimony that he's a true prophet? Was he declaring that as
a prophet, a man, or a desperate cult leader hell-bent on conquering
Missouri? The church doesn't interfere in politics, but the founding
prophet ran for president of the United States and was assassinated
during his campaign?

The two-dimensional Joseph Smith of naïve faith that regular
chapel-going Mormons know doesn't do these people any favors when more
dimensions are added and that body of information is understood. Maybe
Saints will bridge that informational gap during conversations about
Church history. If this book has the reach the leadership wants, it'll
have an impact they don't want.
