---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 89 - Pass Go Collect 60 Bodyguards'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/%e2%80%8bepisode-89-pass-go-collect-60-bodyguards/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-89-pass-go-collect-60-bodyguards
category: History
date: 2018-02-09 07:10:57 +0000
---

Ep 89 -- Pass Go Collect 60 Bodyguards

On this episode, we give Willard Richards his very own NaMo Nickname and
read his whitewashed history of Jo's arrest and court hearing in June of
1841. Jo had found some way to squirrel himself out from under nearly
every legal trouble with which he was accused since he'd started the
religion 11 years prior to this and his lawyers saw it fit to stick with
the trend. We discuss how the trial of the prophet was seen by local
periodicals and the Warsaw Signal's reaction to the increasing political
power wielded by Jo and the church. After that we have on Gottfried to
discuss Isaiah in the Book of Mormon from a nuanced perspective and
finish up with a very brief listener mail segment spurring a much-needed
correction.

Links:

Missouri Joint Fact-Finding Committee report\
<https://www.sos.mo.gov/cmsimages/archives/resources/findingaids/fulltext/f01_f01-06.pdf>

Stephen A. Douglas: The Political Apprenticeship by Reg Ankrom\
<https://books.google.com/books?id=sLEGCAAAQBAJ&pg=PA167&lpg=PA167&dq=sheriff+thomas+king+1841&source=bl&ots=s1YLeZyLgj&sig=_Lz0HdyCqtzBcTsY9d_kfmT5XOA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjd0M3G4pLZAhUDwWMKHSQrCogQ6AEIUzAM#v=onepage&q=sheriff%20thomas%20king%201841&f=false>

Times & Seasons June 1841\
<http://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/cdm/ref/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/9099>

Warsaw Signal 1841 archive\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1841.htm>

Calvin (Charles) Warren, Esq.\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/calvin-averill-warren>

1841 Growing Conflict in Illinois\
<https://www.lds.org/manual/church-history-in-the-fulness-of-times-student-manual/chapter-twenty-one?lang=eng>

Joseph Smith and the Criminal Justice System\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Smith_and_the_criminal_justice_system>

Nauvoo Charter\
<https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Nauvoo_Charter>

1841 articles Missouri News Articles\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/MO/Miss1841.htm#061941>

1841 Quincy Whig\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/IL/whig1841.htm#0612>

MyBoM Episode 190 - Gottfried Comment\
<https://mybookofmormonpodcast.com/2018/01/13/190/#comments>

Isaiah Variants in BoM\
<https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/isaiah-and-prophets-inspired-voices-old-testament/isaiah-variants-book-mormon>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Hello Fresh

Early June 1841 was a fragile time for the Mormons. In a tragic repeat
of 1838 when Jo was arrested in Missouri prior to the Saints being
removed from that state, Jo was once again in handcuffs after meeting
with Governor Carlin in Quincy, Illinois. This arrest warrant put Jo in
the custody of the state of Missouri as there was an extradition clause
couched in the order. It should be noted that the actual warrant was
issued back in 1839 by Lilburn Boggs in response to Jo escaping the
custody of the Missouri constables, but Governor Carlin, for whatever
reason, sat on it for 2 years before acting.

Why the renewed fervor in arresting Jo? What happened which caused
Governor Carlin to finally send the constables after Jo when they'd been
nothing but helpful for 2 years prior to this moment? Well, something
occurred in 1841 which reopened old wounds from the 1838 Mormon war in
Missouri. The November 1838 grand jury trial was prosecuted based on
reams of documents collected by a small fact-finding committee. They
spent what little time they had in preparing hundreds of documents and
the grand jury trial decided to move forward with a regular jury trial
based on the evidence collected.

When you open the folder in the Missouri state online records, the first
document you find is an extract from the Journal of the Joint
Legislative Committee to investigate the late difficulties with the
Mormons and here's a quick extract of the preamble to their report:

"\[We\] have thought it unwise and injudicious matter---the existing
circumstances of this case, to predicate a report upon papers,
documents, &c purporting to be copies of the evidence taken before an
examining court held in Richmond Ray County for the purpose of inquiring
into the charges alleged against the people called "Mormons growing out
of the late difficulties between the people, and other Citizens of this
state.

\[We\] consider the evidence taken in the examination there held, in a
great degree, expartie, and not of the character which should be desired
for the basis of a fair and candid investigation. Moreover, the papers,
documents, &c have not been certified in such a manner as to satisfy the
Committee of their authenticity."

Essentially, the fact-finding committee stated explicitly in this and
multiple instances that the documents they had procured in their
week-long investigation were insufficient to conclude a legitimate trial
and that they had yet to even authenticate many of them. These documents
were used by Justice King to incarcerate Jo and friends until more
investigation could be done and the state could prepare a full jury
trial case against the Prophet.

But, in no way should these documents have been made public before Jo
stood trial. Jo and friends had escaped the state of Missouri and 2
years later, somebody saw it fit to release these documents to the
public. They were met with outrage. Suddenly, everything the Mormons had
done in Missouri for all of 1838 was public knowledge and the newspapers
went wild. Only problem with all of it, just like today when a massive
dossier of information comes out, no one person was reading through all
the documents and understand everything in context. Pundits in national
newspaper outlets were reading the Danite manifesto and the testimony of
Doctor Sampson Avard without reading the hundreds of other documents
collected by the committee and they'd compose massive articles about the
Mormon's military efforts in Missouri.

The fact-finding committee knew this would happen if the documents ever
got out. They knew that any reader of these documents would instantly be
prejudiced against the Mormons making a fair trial absolutely
impossible.

The arrest of Joseph Smith in June of 1841 was in direct response to the
renewed public outcry from these documents being published. The Missouri
government wanted justice against Jo, but now the broader public wanted
justice and were willing to go to extreme lengths to make it happen. The
two years from 1839-1841 had been a brief respite from Missouri
persecution, but that persecution was put on steroids and the public
outcry wouldn't be satiated until the streets ran red with the blood of
the Prophet.

Jo was in handcuffs, but he'd prepared for just this occasion. Written
into the Nauvoo charter was this funny little clause:

"Sec. 17. The Mayor shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all cases
arising under the ordinances of the corporation, and shall issue such
process as may be necessary to carry such ordinances into execution and
effect; ... The Municipal Court shall have power to grant writs of
habeas corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the City
Council."

That clause made it so the Mayor of Nauvoo or anyone in relevant
official government capacity could issue a writ of habeas corpus to any
other government official to release any prisoner they saw fit to write
said writ of habeas corpus. The mayor of Nauvoo with this executive get
out of jail free card was Jo's third in command, General John C.
Wreck-it Bennett. The Mormon influence on members of government reached
far beyond just those councilors and aldermen composing the Nauvoo
government. One of these government officials was master in chancery for
Adams County, Calvin A. Warren, referred to as Charles A. Warren Esq.,
in what we'll be soon reading.

The posse which arrested Jo had planned to take him straight across the
Mississippi to Missouri and down to Richmond to answer for his charges
of arson, robbery, and treason against the Union. Warren's quick action
to compose Jo's writ of habeas corpus meant the posse wasn't even able
to cross the Mississippi before the Nauvoo marshal approached them with
the writ granting Jo's release. Naturally, the posse answered with
skepticism. This entire article we're going to read was printed in the
Times and Season on 15^th^ June 1841 for all Mormons and anti-Mormons to
consume. We're reading it out of the history of the church and the
pro-Mormon slant is rather brazen in its presentation of the events.

But, before reading it, we have a new NaMo nickname inductee to
introduce. Willard Richards was a fun one and I'm left with a challenge
in arbitrarily deciding which of all the proposed names to use for our
historical timeline. A few of my favorites were from Jonathan Dille on
Facebook who said Scrubbing Bubbles Richards and \@TNickPerkins on
twitter who said "How can Willard's NaMo nickname be anything other than
Big Willy Dick?!" which gave me quite a chuckle. We would be using that
one if not for the extant pictures of the man, come on.... Look at
him..... it'd be like calling him Slim, it just doesn't fit. Another
good entry came in anecdotal form from Willard Richard's ol' chump,
\@DavyWhhitmer who proposed Billard Dickards saying "Richards' knobby
walking stick not only doubled as a gun whacker, but was also used as a
billiards stick. He was quite the shark! This earned his cane the nick
name Billards Dickards. You're hearing this breaking church history here
first" so definitely loved that.

But, one must emerge victorious and that came from Brent Toney on
facebook who sent in White-out Willard. This really was a hard one to
decide, but given White-out Willard's license to write Mormon history
exactly how he saw fit, this is the perfect NaMo nickname. Thanks for
playing along everybody and be sure to follow Brent Toney on Facebook as
this week's winner of the NaMoNickNameGame. We'll pick up this week's
nominee for NMNNG at the end of the history today.

With that taken care of, let's read how White-out Willard reported the
following events after Jo's arrest in June of 1841.

Vol 4:362

"\[after my arrest\] I accordingly returned to Quincy, and obtained a
writ of Habeas Corpus from Charles A. Warren, Esq., master in chancery,
and Judge Stephen A. Douglas happening to come to Quincy that evening,
he appointed to give a hearing on the writ on the Tuesday following in
Monmouth, Warren County, where the court would then commence a regular
term...

Sunday 6---News of my arrest having arrived in Nauvoo last night, and
being circulated thorough the city, Hosea Stout, Tarleton Lewis, William
A. Hickman (Wild Bill Hickman), John S. Higbee, Elijah Able \[Abel, the
first black man to get the priesthood\], Uriel C. Nickerson, and George
W. Clyde, stared from the Nauvoo landing in a skiff, in order to
overtake me, and rescue me, if necessary. They had a heavy head wind,
but arrived in Quincy at dusk; went up to Benjamin Jones's house, and
found that I had gone to Nauvoo in charge of two officers.

I returned to Nauvoo in charge of the officers (Sheriff King had been
suddenly seized with sickness; I nursed and waited upon him in my own
house, so that he might be able to go to Monmouth), and notified several
of my friends to get ready and accompany me the next morning."

Quick side note, one of Jo's enemies falling immediately sick as soon as
he got near Jo while Jo "nursed" him to health wasn't unheard of at this
time, nor would this be the last time such a thing would happen. This
brief stop in Nauvoo allowed Jo to amass his own posse of Nauvoo Legion
bodyguards.

"Monday 7---I started very early for Monmouth, seventy-five miles
distant (taking Mr. King along with me, and attending him during his
sickness), accompanied by Charles C. Rich, Amasa Lyman, Shadrack Roundy,
Reynolds Cahoon, Charles Hopkins, Alfred Randall, Elias Higbee, Morris
Phelps, John P. Greene, Henry G. Sherwood, Joseph Younger, Darwin Chase,
Ira Miles, Joel S. Miles, Lucien Woodworth, Vinson Knight, Robert B.
Thompson, George Miller, and others. We traveled very late, camping
about midnight in the road."

Once they arrived on Monmouth, the crowds gathered for a chance to
witness the prophet and voice their ignorant rage about the Mormon war
revelations. The Mormons had gone viral in Illinois and the surrounding
states. They were a curiosity to some, and demons from hell to others.
The people wanted to witness Jo first-hand to see if he had horns like
the rumors claimed. Jo Kardashian had just arrived on horseback and the
people wanted selfies and autographs. Besides, what else are these
people going to do on a random Tuesday morning after they'd finished
reading the local paper's article about the Danites? Sure, people went
to their jobs, but maybe they can put off planting this year's crop for
one more day because there's something interesting to see in town! The
curiosity and novelty of the prophet represented only a minority of the
crowd. Most of it was comprised of people who didn't have the Prophet's
best interests in mind.

The Mormons had national recognition by this point. Newspapers from New
Orleans to New York were regularly publishing article about the Mormons
because the populous was interested and articles about the Mormons sold
like hotcakes. But for every person who was curious about the Mormons,
10 followed who thought they were religious fanatics led by the devil
incarnate. Represented in that latter group were also all the people
who'd been burned by the Mormons. The Saints were 10k strong at this
point and those people came from all over the Union and even from across
the pond. There were a lot of people living in Illinois who had a loved
one who'd been led astray by the wretched Book of Mormon. There were
people living in Illinois who'd lived in Missouri sometime in the last 6
years who had come to know what a Mormon kingdom looks like; it's
understandable they would be a little cross with Jo and friends. Then,
there were also the people who'd been directly defrauded by Jo or some
other Mormon by land speculation, bogus money, or investment into the
KSS Company. Others had been converted, read Eber Howe's book and
learned Mormonism was a fraud, then actively sought to dismantle the
church by convening in large mobs to surround the prophet anywhere he
went. Maybe some ill luck could befall him among a crowd of dozens or
hundreds of people. There were people in the crowd who wanted Jo dead.
This was no friendly mob.

Jo spent the morning of Tuesday 8^th^ June getting breakfast at the
local Tavern in Monmouth. The hearing for Jo's writ of habeas corpus was
slated for that day, but the state's Attorney asked to postpone to the
next day, "on account of his not being prepared, not having had
sufficient notice of the trial." The court decided to reconvene the next
day, which only made the angry mob who wanted to see Jo dead or locked
behind bars even angrier.

Here's Jo's telling of the events of Tuesday and Wednesday, we'll
compare it to another version momentarily.

"\[I\] found great excitement prevailing in the public mind, and great
curiosity was manifested by the citizens, who were extremely anxious to
obtain "a sight of the Prophet," expecting to see me in chains. Mr. King
(whose health was now partly restored) had considerable difficulty in
protecting me from the mob that had gathered there."

Here's a version that's seems to match a bit closer to reality written
by Reg Ankrom in his great biography of Stephen A. Douglas: The
Political Apprenticeship, beginning on page 167:

"By agreement of Smith's defense, led by Orville Browning and Archibald
Williams of Quincy, and State's Attorney Morrison, the hearing was
delayed a day, which gave an excited crowd more time to fester against
Smith. A rumor circulated that the evidence would not justify a
conviction, and by the next day a gallows had been erected in the court
yard and a mob pushed their way into the courthouse."

Stephen A. Douglas was the Justice overseeing the proceedings of the
court. This was good news for Jo, Douglas had just graced the Mormons
with a giant political favor of appointing Wreck-it Bennett to the
position of Master in Chancery last episode, and the Mormons considered
him a friend. We can't move forward without mentioning how much Stephen
Douglas was simply pandering for the Mormon bloc vote. He was an
up-and-coming politician in Illinois, he'd served in the Illinois
militia in the black hawk war of 1832 which could be better summarized
as almost completely a one-sided slaughter. Since then Douglas had been
moving up the political ladder running as a Democratic candidate, but
losing a number campaigns for various offices. He had been recently
appointed associate justice of the Illinois Supreme Court in 1841 at the
same time he was pandering to the Mormons to get their blessing in any
upcoming elections in which he would decide to run. Somebody like
Stephen Douglas on the rise in politics with the Mormon voting bloc
behind him, Douglas would have been a fool to cross Jo.

The mob knew how tight Jo and Douglas were, which may help explain why
they erected the gallows in protest of the sham court about to be
underway on Wednesday the 9^th^. The courthouse was flooded by a mob. In
response, Douglas ordered the sheriff to clear the courtroom, but the
one Sheriff was overrun by dozens of angry people wanting justice to be
served in the form of vigilante lynch mob. Douglas took this emergency
opportunity to appoint a new sheriff, a large fellow Kentuckian friend
of his who he knew could handle the job. From later in Douglas's
biography by Ankrom:

"'I appoint you sheriff of this court,' Douglas bellowed. 'Select your
own deputies, and as many of them as you require. Clear this courtroom.'

The Kentuckian, said by observers to have thrown some men out the
courthouse windows, the courtroom was cleared in twenty minutes. Telling
the story, Douglas biographer James Sheahan noted that Douglas had no
authority to appoint another sheriff since the county's elected sheriff
was present. But this was an emergency, Sheahan continues, and there was
no time to debate the fine points about the constitutional limits of
Douglas's power. By Douglas's quick action Smith had been saved from the
makeshift gallows. Smith was exceedingly grateful."

With the courthouse cleared of the lynch mob who were trying to serve
justice upon Jo's neck, the court could finally proceed with the
hearing. Just to clarify before we pick things up in the HoC, this
hearing wasn't for Jo's crimes in Missouri, this was just to hear
whether or not the court would grant the writ of habeas corpus written
by Charles Warren of Adams County, which would release Jo from the
custody of the posse. This hearing had an incredibly narrow scope, a
fact which Jo and his lawyers used to their advantage.

Vogel HoC 4:363

"Mr. Morrison, on behalf of the people, wished for time to send to
Springfield for the indictment, it not being found with the rest of the
papers. This course would have delayed the proceedings, and, as it was
not important to the issue, the attorneys for the defense admitted that
there was an indictment, so that the investigation might proceed."

This is an important detail to begin the court proceedings with. The
lawyer for the state, Mr. Morrison, wanted a copy of the arrest warrant
to enter into the court as evidence, but it couldn't be found and it was
necessary to send a messenger to Springfield or Quincy to obtain a copy
of it. This would have held up the court, so both prosecution and
defense decided to continue on without going to the trouble of getting a
copy of the original indictment. This will come back to haunt the
prosecution.

"Mr. Warren, for the defense, then read the petition, which stated that
I was unlawfully held in custody, and that the indictment in Missouri
was obtained by fraud, bribery, and duress, all of which I was prepared
to prove."

It's worth noting that Governor Carlin of Illinois was the original
signer to the warrant for Jo's arrest, but originally it came from
Governor Lilburn Boggs before he left office in late 1839. The arrest
warrant had been simply sitting Governor Carlin's office for two years
without ever being put into effect. Governor Carlin had met with Jo and
other high ranking Mormon officials, multiple times, allowing ample time
for him to execute the warrant and place Jo, Rigdon, and other elites
under the custody of the State of Illinois to be extradited to Missouri
to answer for high crimes. Carlin never committed the Hancock or Adams
County sheriffs to take Jo into custody until more than 2 years after
the initial arrest warrant was issued.

This fact became the primary argument for Jo's defense lawyers, but gets
lost in the retelling from what we and other historians take away from
reading just the HoC.

"All the lawyers on the opposite side, excepting two, viz., Messrs.
Knowlton and Jennings, confined themselves to the merits of the case,
and conducted themselves as gentlemen: but it was plainly evident that
the design of Messrs. Knowlton and Jennings was to excite the public
mind still more on the subject, and inflame the passions of the people
against me and my religion."

I've searched far and wide online to gain access to the court minutes
from this hearing but I can't seem to find them anywhere. It would be
interesting to know the exact details of the arguments being thrown
around the courthouse on this day, but all we can do is infer based on
the information that is provided. I'm not saying those court documents
don't exist and aren't online, I'm merely saying I spent many hours
chasing google rabbit holes and reading newspaper clippings to try and
construct the arguments made by the respective lawyers, but the search
has come up dry. It has been entertaining reading so many articles about
this court proceeding though, even though most of them were reprints
from the Quincy Whig and Warsaw Signal.

From what I've gathered, even though it fell outside the scope of this
particular court hearing on the merits of the arrest warrant, it seems
as if both sides were merely bickering about the merits of the November
1838 grand jury trial which convicted Jo, Sidekick-Abiff Hyrum Smith,
and Hingepin Rigdon to Liberty Jail. The defense seems to have made the
argument that Missouri acted outside the scope of the law and persecuted
the Mormons on religious bases, but the prosecution seemed to make the
argument that the Missouri Grand Jury trial was merely to ascertain if
there was enough evidence to proceed with a jury trial and that
religious persecution had nothing to do with the case. Neither of these
arguments had any place in this hearing as the only subject which should
have been discussed is whether or not the state of Illinois would hold
to the arrest warrant issued 2 years ago by Governor Lilburn Boggs and
extradite Jo to Missouri, or if they would grant the writ of habeas
corpus and release the prisoner.

However, just like every terrible court movie ever, each side did their
level best to sway the court through emotive arguments that the Mormons
had either been wrongfully persecuted, or that Jo was a criminal
deserving of a proper trial judged by a jury of his peers.

A confounding variable among the two sides arguing the merits of the
Mormons' case in Missouri or the merits of the writ of habeas corpus was
the political posturing going on. Remember, Judge Stephen Douglas was
friendly to Jo and the Mormons and served as the presiding judge, but
the lawyers had to worry about their careers in the state hinging upon
the outcome of this trial. If the arrest warrant is upheld by this
court, Jo gets taken to Missouri and hanged for treason. All the
pandering the various lawyers and politicians have done for the Mormon
suddenly becomes a liability. If Jo goes free, the lawyers who opposed
him have no career in Illinois politics while the Mormons remain voters
in the state of Illinois. It wasn't just the fate of the Mormons and Jo
riding on this decision, the Mormons were plutonium and everybody who'd
ever touched them had a lot riding on the outcome of this seemingly
simple court hearing for an arrest warrant.

"Some had even been told, that if they engaged on the side of the
defense, they need never look to the citizens of that county for any
political favors. But they were not to be overawed by the popular
clamor, or be deterred from an act of public duty by any insinuations or
threats whatever, and stated that if they had not before determined to
discharge their duty. The counsel for the defense spoke well, without
exception; and strongly urged the legality of the court examining
testimony to prove that the whole proceedings on the part of Missouri
were base and illegal, and that the indictment was obtained through
fraud, bribery, and corruption."

According to the HoC, unfortunately for the state of Missouri and all
those opposed to Jo and the Mormons, the prosecution attorney was in bad
shape for the hearing, which played to the Mormons' advantage.

"A young lawyer from Missouri volunteered to plead against me; he tried
his utmost to convict me, but was so high with liquor, and chewed so
much tobacco, that he often called for cold water. Before he had spoken
many minutes he turned sick, requested to be excused by the court, and
went out of the Court House puking all the way down stairs. (As the
Illinoisans call the Missouri people pukes, this circumstance caused
considerable amusement to the members of the bar.) During his plea, his
language was so outrageous that the judge was twice under the necessity
of ordering him to be silent.

Mr. O. H. Browning then commenced his plea, and in a short time the
puking lawyer returned, and requested the privilege of finishing his
plea, which was allowed."

Now the defense turns up the emotive rhetoric to unbearable levels...

"Afterwards Mr. Browning resumed his pleadings, which were powerful; and
when he gave a recitation of what he himself had seen at Quincy, and on
the banks of the Mississippi river when the Saints were "exterminated
from Missouri," where he tracked the persecuted women and children by
their bloody footmarks in the snow, they were so affecting that the
spectators were often dissolved in tears. Judge Douglass himself, and
most of the officers wept, for they were under the necessity of keeping
the spectators company."

Thus day one of the hearing was terminated, which was all it took to
convince Judge Stephen Douglas that it was proper to side with the
Mormons. His judgement would be passed down at 9 a.m. the following
morning after considering all the available evidence and arguments, but
also keeping in mind his stance with the Mormons and the fact that his
political career was held in the balance. Judge Douglas made a judgement
call. He likely thought the Mormons would be spending decades in
Illinois and if he let the Prophet off on a technicality his name would
be revered among Mormons for upholding the religious liberty of the land
when the Mormons were in a time of desperation.

The following morning, Judge Douglas summarized the arguments and
delivered his decision:

"... the writ being once returned to the executive by the sheriff of
Hancock County was dead, and stood in the same relationship as any other
writ which might issue from the Circuit Court; and consequently, the
defendant could not be held in custody on that writ. The other point,
whether evidence in the case was admissible or not, he would not at that
time decide, as it involved great and important considerations relative
to the future conduct of the different states. There being no precedent,
as far as they had access to authorities which could be obtained on the
subject, before he would decide that point. But on the other the
defendant must be liberated."

Essentially, the warrant for Jo's arrest was thrown out because Governor
Carlin had ample time and opportunity to act upon it without doing so.
The warrant had therefore extinguished its statute of limitations and
was thrown out of court, and the writ of habeas corpus by Charles Warren
was granted. Jo and his massive posse of 60 body guards walked out of
the courthouse that day flanked by the local sheriffs for protection
from the outraged mob.

"Thus have I been once more delivered from the fangs of my cruel
persecutors, for which I thank God, my Heavenly Father."

A letter was immediately sent to Nauvoo to be published in the next
edition of the Times and Seasons commending the efforts of Orville
Browning and Judge Douglas for siding with the Mormons.

"It was an effort worthy of a high-minded and honorable gentleman, such
as we ever considered him to be, since we have had the pleasure of his
acquaintance. Soon after we came out of Missouri, he sympathized with us
in our afflictions, and we are indeed rejoiced to know that he yet
maintains the same principles of benevolence."

As long as the Mormons remained in Illinois, Orville Browning would
always have a job or electoral seat with the Mormons. This was Jo and
the elite's way of winking to Browning saying we'll be happy to scratch
your back when the time comes, thanks for scratching ours.

The Warsaw Signal is utterly delightful to read for the next few
installments into mid-July 1841. ThomAss Sharp realized just how
powerful Jo was becoming with the court system granting the bogus habeas
corpus appeal written by a friend of the prophet. He took the
opportunity to bring to public notice the fact that the Mormons were now
the single largest voting bloc in the state and there were local
elections coming up in August, a mere 2 months away. The Mormons had
already queued up their favorite Mormons or Mormon sympathizers to take
various local offices; ThomAss Sharp saw it fit to respond accordingly
after summarizing the events of the sham court hearing among other
important items of business.

"It is said that Mr. Browning\'s eloquence, in describing the
persecution of the Mormons, on the trial of Joe Smith, at Monmouth, last
week, drew tears from the eyes of Judge Douglass. \
\
Query \-- Were there any onions about? 

THE HABEAS CORPUS. \-- We noticed the fact, last week, of the arrest of
Joe Smith, under a warrant from the Governor, on a demand made by the
Governor of Missouri, and of his having been brought before Judge
Douglass, at Monmouth, on a writ of Habeas Corpus. We since learn, that
after a hearing of the case he was discharged \-- on the grounds of the
illegality of the writ."

THE DANITES.

Will our kind friend, the Prophet, or the talented editors of the
\"Times and Seasons\" give us some further information relative to the
\"Danite Society\" of Latter Day Saints? We publish to-day a very
interesting account of it, under the head of \"Correspondence of the New
York Evangelist,\" and we would be glad to learn something more of its
character. Have you one in complete organization now, at Nauvoo? or is
it merged in the \"Nauvoo Legion?\" Please send us a constitution. We
would like to publish it."

"According to a request contained in the proceedings above alluded to,
the County Commissioners\' Clerk has politely forwarded us the number of
delegates which each Precinct is entitled, which is as follows: 

> Precincts No. of del. No of votes
>
> Bear Creek 2 20
>
> Montebello 3 26
>
> Chili 5 46
>
> Appanosse 5 51
>
> CampCreek 8 61
>
> Fountain Green 8 85
>
> Augusta 8 81
>
> St. Mary\'s 10 104
>
> Green Plains 12 117
>
> Warsaw 20 197
>
> La Harpe 20 202
>
> Carthage 33 332
>
> Commerce 41 409

We now ask our fellow citizens to take an interest in this matter. Will
each Precinct hold a meeting, and appoint the number of delegates
designated in the above list \-- good men and true \-- who will act \--
and act understandingly? We wish to see whether Hancock county has the
spirit to resist the religious and military despotism which is attempted
to be fastened upon her. We wish to know whether Joe Smith is to be the
dispenser of honor and office among us, as he is among his deluded
followers"

ThomAss Coke Sharp kept an eager eye on the Mormons through his outlet
of the Warsaw signal. We introduced him a few episodes ago, but I've
only been using the name he was endowed with by Jo's younger brother
Crazy Willey Smith when he starts up the Wasp. ThomAss Sharp couldn't
let any action the Mormons took go unanswered and he spearheaded the
anti-Mormon movement in Illinois. Next or the following week we'll get
into him starting the actual Anti-Mormon political party to combat those
delegate and vote numbers the Mormons held as reported in the previous
article, but for now, we need to endow ThomAss Coke Sharp with a proper
NaMoNickname. Sharp's name does him a service as he was pointed and
calculated in his periodicals against the Mormons, we could call him
tackman... cuz he's Sharp as a tack.... Tackman..... He was known for
his smack downs of the Mormons and his scathing commentary, and one
great journalist was known for his Hitch-slaps so maybe ThomAss can be
known for bringing the AssSmackdown when it was called for.

Here's another great article from Thomas Sharp clarifying the political
position of the Warsaw Signal:

"OUR POSITION \-- AGAIN.

We have several times been asked whether we profess to represent
the Whig party in the controversy in which we have engaged, relative to
the Mormon ascendancy in this county. If by the Whig party is meant
certain individuals calling themselves leaders, who make Party their
God, and sacrifice everything at her shrine \-- or if is meant
those kind-hearted and sympathetic gentlemen whose feelings are so
deeply touched at the idea of \"persecution.\" as our poor action
of self-defense is perversely termed \-- or if is meant that class
of high-minded politicians whose highest glory is to fawn upon and
flatter Joe Smith, and who are ready to toss coppers for the honor of
escorting him from place to place \-- or if is meant that class of
persons who yet think the Mormons may be some political utility in
future elections \-- we answer, that we do not profess to represent any
of these. On the contrary, we profess to represent in this controversy
those high-minded and independent citizens of Hancock who dare to
think, and fear not to speak their thoughts. We profess to represent
those of both political parties, who are not shackled by self-interest,
and who have the manliness to stand up for their rights in opposition to
the dictates of a political and military Church. We profess to represent
that class of our fellow citizens who would save the country and state
from the disgrace of being ruled by an ignorant and unprincipled
aspirant for power \-- from the degradation of submitting to religious
despotism in a land of freedom and laws. We profess to represent those,
too, who are not willing to wait until they are trodden under foot
before they make resistance."

Sharp was a straight shooter when it came to politics, not siding with
any party but examining each subject as he saw it through the eyes of
what was fair and right. We could call him the SharpShooter. What do you
think we should call Thomas Coke Sharp? Vote or propose your nomination
with \#NaMoNickname on twitter or facebook \@nakedmormonism or email it
in to <nakedmormonism@gmail.com> and I'll arbitrarily select my
favorite. I know you guys are far more clever than yours truly so I
leave Thomas Sharp in your hands.

The situation is heating up in Nauvoo with the Mormons. For every new
convert, another dozen people learned about the delusion of Mormonism
and wanted to read everything the newspapers were saying about these
religious fanatics. We'll continue to keep track of how the Mormons were
treated in periodicals with national recognition and how the Mormon
elite responded to these claimed slanders and abuse through their own
propaganda outlets. Jo escaped the clutches of the Missouri government
through a small technicality and this wasn't the first or last time it
would happen in his life. One historian claimed Joseph was arrested or
brought to trial 42 times in his life, but never actually convicted of
anything. A rap sheet like that sure doesn't seem to ring of a good,
honest, godlike man, Jo really begins to come into focus as a con-man
and crimelord as we progress closer to his ultimate demise a mere 3
years ahead of where our timeline currently resides. Stay tuned
everybody.

Hello Fresh

We're about to get into an interesting conversation about the Book of
Mormon. Before we do, I just need to let you guys know that patrons of
the show at patreon.com/nakedmormonism get access to another segment of
this interview which just about doubles the amount of time we had Jeff
on. He and I talk Sidney Rigdon and the Spalding theory to a great
extent and it was a really fun conversation, so if you want access to
that, go pledge a dollar an episode and you'll get the extended edition
of this episode, all episodes ad free, and this week you'll also see our
monthly NaMo home evening with featured guest Mormon historian Joe
Geisner who informed us on some finer points of Jo's early history and
told us a bit about Nauvoo history we're setting our sights on in the
coming months of the show as we progress through the Nauvoo years. Lots
of exclusive content every week, a fun community of people commenting or
joining for the live hangouts on the first Monday of each month, and all
around good times to be had on the patreon feed so if you aren't signed
up, please consider doing so. Without further ado, here's my interview
with Jeff about Isaiah in the Book of Mormon.

Hiram Hyrum

Seattle Atheists Darwin Day Feb 18

Mormon Doctrine AMA Feb 17th

Bonus:

"When I was at dinner a man rushed in and said, "Which is Jo Smith? I
have got a five dollar Kirtland bill, and I'll be damned if he don't
take it back I'll sue him, for his name is to it." I replied, "I am the
man"; took the bill and paid him the specie, which he took very
reluctantly, being anxious to kick up a fuss."
