---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 122 - Bennett Meltdown pt 2 Sarah Pratt'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-122-bennett-meltdown-pt-2-sarah-pratt/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/122-bennett-meltdown-pt-2-sarah-pratt
category: History
date: 2018-09-27 22:00:00 +0000
---

122 -- Bennett Meltdown pt 2 Sarah Pratt

On this episode, we dive into the continued chaos incited by Bennett's
violent departure from the church and his expose. Bennett gives voice to
the voiceless and Jo slays the character of Sarah Pratt for allegations
she made against his character. Nobody would escape the meltdown; the
casualties are beginning to pile up.

Links:

Sarah Pratt the Shaping of an Apostate by Van Wagoner\
<https://www.dialoguejournal.com/wp-content/uploads/sbi/articles/Dialogue_V19N02_71.pdf>

Is Sarah Pratt Reliable?\
<http://mormonpolygamydocuments.org/sarah-pratt-reliable/>

Sarah Pratt on FairMormon\
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/John_C._Bennett/Sarah_Pratt#cite_ref-27>

Bennett Saintly Scoundrel\
<http://www.salamandersociety.com/museum/bennett/>

Bennett Sangamo Journal Expose\
<https://archive.org/stream/039SJO18420729001/039-SJO-1842-07-15-001#page/n1/search/pratt>

Rise and Fall of Infamous Bennett\
<http://www.lostmormonism.com/infamous-mormon-john-c-bennett/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Recreant intro

The meltdown had begun, it was a firesale in Nauvoo to preserve what
little bits of reputation that could be salvaged from the wreckage. The
revelations quickly coming to light across the country threatened Joseph
Smith and the Church. How could they possibly stop the remainder of
Bennett's exposes coming to the public eye?

They couldn't. All that Jo and the rest of the Mormon elite could do was
act out of self-preservation.

The next issue of the Sangamo Journal after the initial printing reveals
some interesting developments since Bennett's first letter had gone
public the week before. The movements within Nauvoo are quite
fascinating as well. Bennett wasn't alone in his dissent, he was just
the most public and most willing to openly oppose Jo and the Nauvoo
theocracy. Sidney Rigdon, largely due to Jo locking his daughter Nancy
in a room and forcefully propositioning her, along with Rigdon's
son-in-law George W. Robinson, Francis Higbee, all of these prominent
figures in Nauvoo Mormonism were showing signs that they were fed up
with it. The most notable of these prominent figures was Orson Pratt.
Let's spend some time talking about Orson and his partner, Sarah Pratt,
today. What happened with her? What caused her to become reviled in
Mormon history as an angry apostate?

Let's begin by examining the majority of Jo's wives up to this point.
With only a few exceptions, most of Jo's wives were already married to
other men in elite ranks. Fanny Alger was an exception to this, as was
Eliza Snow, but Lucinda Harris, Louisa Beaman, Zina Huntington,
Presendia Huntington, Agnes Coolbrith, Sylvia Sessions, Mary Rollins,
Patty Sessions, Marinda Nancy Johnson, all of these women taken into
marriage prior to summer 1842 were all other men's wives. This had a few
benefits in keeping the marriages secret.

When Jo married other men's wives, they'd still continue to live with
their first husbands and Jo wouldn't be responsible for supporting them,
financially or emotionally as an equal partner. Also, inevitably
resulting pregnancies were concealed. Plus, Jo could try and keep the
relationships secret from the women's husbands, or he could get the
husbands in on it with promises of eternal exaltation, access to the
kingdom on high, and great mansions with progeny without number in the
world to come. That was a pretty solid sales pitch for anybody who
believed Jo was the one true prophet and actually could grant those
promises.

When Jo started marrying single women, that created an interesting set
of ramifications for everybody involved. How would they be financially
supported when their husband could never be spoken of to anyone? What if
they wanted to go on a date, or go to a public dance where they would
inevitably be courted, but they were already reserved by the prophet as
one of his wives, what could these women do? What reason could they give
for turning down a date? Beyond that, an unmarried woman in a very
tight-knit insular group getting pregnant out of wedlock, well, that had
a whole mess of ramifications that are too complex for us to tease apart
here. All of these complications play a role in our discussion today.

What was the situation with Sarah Pratt, what happened with her and her
marriage to Orson Pratt? Let's begin with a brief biographical sketch.
You'll find a link to the Joseph Smith Papers biography of Sarah Marinda
Bates Pratt in the show notes.

Sarah was born on February 5, 1817 to Cyrus Bates and Lydia Harrington
Bates. She'd been present along with her husband, Orson Pratt, for most
events of Church history since Orson Brain-Powered Pratt baptized her in
June 1835.

Orson Pratt was a member of Zion's Camp and his participation resulted
in induction to the Quorum of Apostles when it was organized in 1835.
Orson Pratt, and anybody attached to him like Sarah, would enjoy
elevated status in the Church from that time forward.

Orson and Sarah met while Orson had been proselytizing. He wrote this of
their introduction:

"Went to Brother Bates, found them all well. I was very much enjoyed to
see them as I had been absent about 1 yr., and more especially as I had
previously formed an acquaintance with their daughter with whom I had
held a correspondence by letter and with whom I shortly expected to
enter into the sacred bonds of matrimony."

I can't find those letters anywhere unfortunately. Regardless, they were
married a month after that journal entry. As is often the case with
women in Mormon history, we're forced to track the movements of a person
through their prominent significant other. This is from Richard Van
Wagoner's article on Sarah Pratt, titled the Shaping of an Apostate.
You'll find a link in the show notes:

"After a three-day honeymoon, Orson resumed his missionary duties,
leaving Sarah with her family. He returned to Henderson several times
before October, when he and Sarah moved to a dollar-a-month apartment in
Kirtland, Ohio.

Orson began trading in stoves and ironwear, but a general downturn in
the national economy coupled with Kirtland's spiraling land speculation
and the fiscal mismanagement of the Kirtland Safety Society destroyed
the economic foundation of the Mormon utopia. The couple had a few
financial resources when Sarah gave birth on 11 July 1837 to Orson Pratt
Jr., the first of her twelve children. In mid-August, when she and the
baby were able to travel, the young family moved back to the Bates
homestead in New York where Orson worked as a laborer for two months."

After that, the couple briefly moved to New York City as Orson
Brain-powered Pratt fulfilled various mission duties. Remember from so
many moons ago, we gave Orson Pratt the nickname because he was renowned
for his science lectures and invented the tachometer with a clever set
of cogs on the wagon wheel during the exodus to the Mexico Territory.
Orson and Sarah began their journey to the Missouri settlement of Far
West at the behest of Jo's July revelation requiring all Mormons to move
to the new sanctuary. However, due to holdups in traveling and Sarah's
second pregnancy, they didn't make it before Missouri exploded and the
Mormons were chased out while the leadership was thrown in jails. The
Pratts made their way from St. Louis to Quincy, Illinois after spring
1839 began thawing the ground and the Mississippi river. They had
3-month-old Lydia Pratt in their arms for the journey. But that was only
the beginning of their troubles.

"By mid-May 1839, they were living in a small log cabin with the Wilford
Woodruff family at abandoned Fort Des Moines in Montrose, Iowa. Two
months later they moved across the Mississippi to live in a
fourteen-by-sixteen-foot "shanty" that Heber C. Kimball had nearly
completed in Nauvoo.

The brackish waters of the undrained river bottom lands surrounding
Nauvoo produced epidemics of cholera, typhoid, and malaria. Sarah's
eight-month-old baby, Lydia, the first of six of her twelve children who
would not attain adulthood, died 18 August 1839 and was buried across
the Mississippi at Montrose. Eleven days later, grief-stricken Sarah
bade Europe-bound Orson goodbye, an act she would perform many times as
he fulfilled his missionary callings."

It was during this time of destitution that Orson Pratt began his
journey to Europe to accompany the other 8 men of the Quorum of Apostles
to establish the European stakes of the Church. Sarah was left behind.

Van Wagoner quotes Sarah directly in her 1884 reminiscence of this time.

"There was little money then in circulation and people were obliged to
be content to earn what would merely keep soul and body together."

He goes on to note when Jo and Sarah began close proximity, this is when
they likely would have become familiar enough for Jo to have
propositioned her to become one of his wives.

"Joseph Smith had been hiring Sarah for his own family's sewing needs;
and in the fall of 1840, he brought John C. Bennett, a newcomer to
Mormonism, to Sarah's house, saying Bennett "wanted some sewing done and
that \[Sarah\] should do it for \[him\]". Sarah said that she "assented
and Bennett gave me a great deal of work to do"...

Bennett would play a major role in the controversy that would follow
Sarah Pratt all her life."

Sarah Pratt was among the few women who found their voice to publicly
opposed the advances of Jo and other Mormon elites. Miss Nancy Rigdon
was another notable obstructionist to Jo's advances and, of course,
Martha Brotherton was the most public opposition to Bloody Brigham's
advances.

Sarah Pratt is yet one more woman in Mormon history who's been thrown
under the bus because of standing up to sexual predators. Mormon history
is rife with these women throughout its entire history, but these women
stand out as examples in Nauvoo who stood up for their beliefs and
sexual autonomy, not giving in to the powerful men in the Mormon
hierarchy. And we'll learn by the end of today's episode that they
suffered horrible consequences for opposing the sexual advances of
Mormon elites. Sarah Pratt, in particular, is one who has been sound
resoundingly derided in Mormon history and it's incredibly frustrating
to read how her name was weaponized by people with so much to lose if
rumors became facts.

Bennett collected her statement and published it in his History of the
Saints, which was the compilation of all his expose letters in the
Sangamo Journal. Patrons of the show are hearing it all first-hand with
my commentary, patreon.com/nakedmormonism folks. Here's Bennett's sketch
of Sarah Pratt along with some of her own words as a testimony with a
brief intro.

"Amours and Attempted Seductions

Mrs. Sarah M. Pratt

This lady is the wife of Orson "Brain-Power" Pratt, A.M., Professor of
Mathematics in the University of the City of Nauvoo, and is one of the
most elegant, graceful, amiable, and accomplished women in the place.
Mr. S. Francis, editor of the Sangamo Journal, in speaking of her, says,
"It will be recollected that Mrs. Schindle, in her affidavit detailing
the attempt of Smith upon her, said, 'He then told her that she must
never tell of his propositions to her, for he had all influence in that
place, and if she told, *he would ruin her character, and she would be
under the necessity of leaving.*' This same scheme has been carried out
in reference to Mrs. Pratt. She 'told' on the Imposter, and was marked
by him for destruction. In a public speech in Nauvoo, on the 14^th^
July, Joe spoke of this lady---a woman whose reputation had been as fair
as virtue could make it until she came in contact with him---in a manner
only befitting the lowest and most degraded vagabond in existence." Yes,
her reputation was unsullied, and her character as pure as the virgin
snow; nor was even the Mormon Don Juan able to blight this blooming
flower.---This noble and lovely woman was marked out by Joe as a victim.
Her husband was sent to Europe *to convert the heathen,* under a solemn
promise that his family should be honorably provided for by the Church;
but, as Mrs. Pratt was a beautiful and charming woman, Joe's real object
was to convert her in another way---from virtue, unsophisticated virtue,
to vice, soul-damning vice,\--from the path of innocence and peace, to
the polluted way of the libertine,\--from the pure teachings of heaven's
high King, to the loathsome caresses of the *beast and the false
prophet;* but the fowler's snare was broken, and the intended victim
saved."

Bennett then goes on to describe the alleged coercive measures Jo
employed. Should these be true, well.... It paints a picture of Joseph
Smith as a degraded and immoral profligate. Just understand that this is
not the only account of allegations like this concerning Joseph Smith.
To the contrary, allegations of his sexual misdeeds must be ignored to
sell the narrative that he was a conscientious objector to polygamy and
only begrudgingly assented at the behest of an angel with a drawn sword.

"Mrs. Pratt is a highly-educated lady, and had always been used to
living well; but no sooner had her husband crossed the ocean, than Joe
ordered the Bishops to restrict her in her allowance, and reduce her to
a state of absolute want and suffering, in order to make her a more easy
prey. The mandate was obeyed, and, in drear\[y\] winter, without fuel or
food, she found herself in a miserable hovel, with her darling child,
exposed to storm and tempest, and dependent upon the tender mercies of a
cold and unfeeling fraternity to supply her actual wants!!! The
sufferings and privations through which she passed are indescribable;
the blackest fiends of hell would shudder at the thought of such inhuman
treatment; but, alas! She drank the bitter cup, and sipped the dregs."

According to Bennett... and any statement that begins with that phrase
has a mess of conflicts... regardless of such conflicts, according to
Bennett, after Jo supposedly had promised Orson Pratt that Sarah would
be taken care of during his Europe mission, he provided briefly for her
upon Orson's departure, then began deliberately starving her. That's a
step too far and casts the entire account into question because most the
Mormons were wanting for resources at this time and Jo wasn't known for
keeping promises. Sarah probably slipped through the cracks just like
thousands of other starving Mormons. The result, however, was the same.
Sarah found herself in a situation at the age of 25 where her husband
was in a foreign country. She had only her own New York education and
the skillful vocation as seamstress to provide for herself and her
toddler. The Nauvoo Legion and the Mormons' abrupt removal from Missouri
necessitated a lot of manufacturing and mercantile work. Her status in
Nauvoo was the wife of an apostle, but most of the Mormons were still
quite poor in 1842. That, and Orson was in Europe preaching the gospel.
That didn't do their family economy any favors. Sarah must have been a
skilled and intelligent woman out of necessity and she made ends meet
when funds from the church inevitably dried up. The Relief Society was
for the relief of the Mormons' poverty. It remains unknown exactly when
the events about to be described transpired. Sometime before Orson
Brain-power Pratt returned in June 1841, according to Wreck-it Bennett,
Jo decided to approach Sarah. Here's how the events took place according
to Bennett as an incredibly biased first-person account. From History of
the Saints beginning on 228:

"Joe Smith told me, *confidentially,* during the absence of her husband,
that he intended to make Mrs. Pratt one of his spiritual wives, one of
the *Cloistered Saints*, for the Lord had given her to him as a special
favor for his faithfulness and zeal; and, as I had influence with her,
he desired me to assist him in the consummation of his hellish purposes;
but I refused compliance, and told him that she had been much neglected
and abused by the Church, in order to *cloister* her, so far without
success, and that, if the Lord had given her to him, he must attend to
it himself, for I should never offer her an indignity."

Yes, Bennett, such a stand-up guy in telling Jo to pound sand when told
of Jo's intentions with Sarah. This is actually a common theme
underlying many Mormon infiltration exposes. The person writing the
expose is careful to exonerate themselves from any guilt in anything
they reveal, even to the detriment of the reliability of the expose
itself. Such may be the case with Bennett. He had influence with her?
Was he simply a good friend because Sarah was one of the many needed
seamstresses for the Nauvoo Legion? Or, was there something more to it?
Jo would leverage Sarah and Bennett's friendship, whatever it was, in
order to assassinate Sarah's character once Bennett's expose went
public.

According to Bennett, Jo made it very clear how he would deal with Sarah
if she refused.

"'Well,' said he, 'I shall approach her, for there is no harm in it if
she submits to be cloistered, and if her husband should never find it
out; and if she should expose me, as she did Bishop Knight, *I will
blast her character;* so there is no material risk for so desirable a
person.'"

Then something happened that supposedly happened with Nancy Rigdon,
Bennett warned Sarah ahead of time of Jo's wicked designs, tell her that
"she must prepare to repulse him, in so infamous an assault \[on her
virtue\]."

According to Bennett, the big day came for Jo and he wanted to take
Sarah Pratt to wife. They took a carriage to her home where it was just
Sarah and little Orson Jr. Here's what transpired, once again, this is
all according to Wreck-it Bennett, so take it with an entire mine worth
of salt.

"Accordingly, in a few days, Joe proposed to me a visit to Ramus, which
I accepted, and we started from his house, in an open carriage,... rode
into the prairie a few miles, and returned to the house of Captain John
T. Barnett, in Nauvoo, about dusk, where we put up the horse, with
Barnett's permission. Joe pretended we were looking for thieves. After
perambulating for an hour or two, we proceeded to the residence of Mrs.
Pratt, and found her at home, and alone, with the exception of her
little boy, who was then asleep in bed. We were hospitably received, and
our situation rendered as comfortable and agreeable as the tenement
would admit of."

The big moment had arrived. Jo said it himself, if she refuses, what is
the harm in it? He'll just blast her character, and he's the prophet, so
he holds a bit more sway than a poor woman living outside the boundaries
of Nauvoo with no income beyond seamstress work, a common 19^th^-century
euphemism for sex work.

From the Encyclopedia of Prostitution and Sex Work vol 2 circa 2006
written by clinical sociologist and behavioral scientist Melissa
Ditmore:

"Seamstress was a euphemism for "prostitute" in census records and other
documents of the 19^th^ century in the United States. Historical
documentation showing several "seamstresses" sharing common living
quarters may generally be assumed to represent a brothel. Whether this
occupation was reported by prostitutes or supplied by census enumerators
and other officials remains speculative, although potential reasons for
both are easily understood. Legitimate uses of the term should not be
confused with the codified use. Other historical and modern euphemisms
exist, including laundresses and actresses."

Hey, Seattle was built almost exclusively by taxing seamstresses, it's
the world's oldest profession and an important piece to American and
world history we can never forget to include the impact of. Maybe Sarah
had provided all the sewing work Jo required of her and she was given to
Bennett to be his personal seamstress.

Just consider Sarah's place in society at this time. She was a woman
living in destitution and barely providing for herself and her toddler,
Orson Jr. Her husband was absent and she made her living as a
seamstress... Regardless of whether or not she engaged in sex-work, it
was easy to brand the testimony of a seamstress as unreliable in the
court of public opinion, ESPECIALLY when that branding was orchestrated
by the prophet of Mormonism, Mayor of Nauvoo, and Lieutenant-General of
the Nauvoo Legion, all funneled into one demagogue of a deplorable human
being. Do you think people took Sarah's word over Jo's? Would somebody
trust the word of a publicly smeared prostitute against the word of God?
How many women did Jo put in similar situations? What kind of
documentary evidence would we expect to find of this? These encounters
wouldn't be documented whatsoever if not for people like Bennett.
Bennett gave these women credible voice. Historians would never have
evidence for conduct like this in Nauvoo Mormonism without people who
actually published letters written by women in Nauvoo with a credible
government official name. You can already see the systemic power dynamic
putting Sarah at a disadvantage. As soon as Sarah was marked by Jo,
there was no way out of what would happen. She could refuse his advances
and draw the ire of the almighty Jo, or she could go along with it as
dozens, or possibly hundreds, of women did and keep her mouth shut. No
doubt there are some people who engaged in polygamy 100% willingly while
completely informed and consenting, but we need to understand the
coercive forces at play here. The content and context of Jo's
proposition to Sarah is quite revealing of exactly what I'm talking
about here.

"After considerable desultory conversation, Joe asked her if she would
keep a secret for him; to which she assented. "Do you pledge me your
honor,' said he, 'that you will never tell without my permission?' She
replied in the affirmative. He then continued, 'Sister Pratt, the Lord
has given you to me as one of my *spiritual wives*. I have the blessings
of Jacob granted me, as God granted holy men of old; and as I have long
looked upon you with favor, and an earnest desire of connubial bliss, I
hope you will not repulse or deny me.'"

According to Bennett, she knew this was coming, he'd apparently warned
her, but now it was out there and nobody in the room could go back. Also
consider, Pratt was probably living off some provisions in the Bishop's
storehouse to supplement her meager income from seamstress work. If she
refused the prophet's advances, could she expect those provisions to
keep coming in? A lot of coercion is playing into this interaction in
ways we can't imagine.

Here's her reply, making her sound more like the conventional definition
of seamstress instead of the euphemistic definition:

"And is that the great secret that I am not to utter? Am I called upon
to break the marriage covenant, and prove recreant to my lawful husband?
*I never will*. My sex shall not be disgraced, nor my honor sullied. I
care not for the blessings of Jacob, and I believe in no such
revelations, neither will I consent, under any circumstances whatever. I
have one good husband, and that is enough for me."

And that was the end of the transaction. Jo and Bennett left, likely
after a bit more stubborn persuasion was lost, Bennett spent the night
at Barnett's while Jo spent the night with Louisa Beeman and probably
got his rocks off there. Like I said, sure, there may have been some
willing participants, but this shows Jo in a light that doesn't have any
holy veneer whatsoever.

Apparently Bennett followed up with Sarah Pratt after the encounter.

"Next day we returned to Nauvoo. I then called upon Mrs. Pratt, and
asked her if her opinion of Joseph, the Prophet, was the same as
heretofore. She replied, 'No; he is a bad man, beyond a doubt---wicked,
sensual, devilish; but it will not do for me to express myself openly,
or my life might atone for it. It becomes me to move in this matter with
much circumspection; I must be as wise as a serpent, and harmless as a
dove; for I see plainly that Joseph is determined to transgress the
laws, change the ordinance, and break the everlasting covenant of our
heavenly Father, and to set at open defiance every principle of true
godliness and moral rectitude. I exceedingly fear and tremble for the
weak and uneducated of my sex; for an unprincipled libertine,
sensualist, and debauchee, of such unbounded prophetic influence, in a
community like this, may utterly ruin hundreds of pious, unsuspecting
females, under the *potent dictum* of a 'Thus saith the Lord;' and all
the proof they would require would be his simple *ipse dixit*. O, what
total depravity!! What ignorance and impudence in a land of Bibles,
where *Christians* ought to dwell, and worship the Great Ruler of the
Universe in the beauty of holiness! Surely God will not suffer it
long!\... I had a better opinion of human nature; but, alas! I was
deceived. The scaled, however, have fallen from my eyes, and '*whereas I
was once blind*, NOW I SEE.' I am in great trouble on another account.
My husband is a good and pious man, and *a true believer in Mormonism*,
devotedly attached to *Joseph* as the spiritual leader of the Church. He
believes him to be a pure man, and a Prophet of the Lord. Now, if I
should tell him the true story of my sufferings, privations, and
insults, and Joseph should circumvent or meet it within his *infallible
rebuff* of a 'Verily, Thus Saith The Lord,' I fear that Orson would
believe him in preference to me, *unless his faith can be shaken*. How
shall I extricate myself from this fearful dilemma?"

I did cut a little bit of that out for the sake of brevity and holding
off discussing another subject attached to Bennett that may come up in
the future with trying to find Book of Mormon plates. But the crux of
Sarah Pratt's complaints is that Jo put her in a situation that she
can't seem to find a way out of. She was marked and she could agree and
stay silent, or oppose and have her character slain in the public forum.
She was coerced into the situation and her husband, likely the only
person who could defend her against the prophet, was in another country.
She could refuse and remain silent about it, but it was only a matter of
time before that silence was broken... by John C. Wreck-it Bennett. He
threw her name out there, likely without her knowledge or prior consent,
and used it as a weapon against the tyrant Joe Smith.

According to Bennett, Sarah petitioned him for advice as a close friend,
and Bennett's reply is:

"Be quiet, Sarah, under these circumstances, until some event transpires
by which Orson can have ocular and auricular demonstration of the
palpable imposture of the whole scheme of Mormonism, and of the
infidelity and brutality of the *Mormon Mountebank*... and such an event
must soon be consummated, unless there should be a manifest change in
the Mormons Administration."

Bennett goes on to claim:

"Joe afterwards tried to convince Mrs. Pratt of the propriety of his
spiritual wife doctrine, and she at last told him peremptorily, "Joseph,
if you ever attempt any thing of the kind with me again, I will make a
full disclosure to Mr. Pratt on his return home. Depend upon it, *I will
certainly do it*." Joe replied, "Sister Pratt, I hope you will not
expose me, for if I suffer, all must suffer; so do not expose me. Will
you promise me that you will not do it?" "If", said she, "you will never
insult me again, I will not expose you, unless strong circumstances
should require it." "If you should tell," said he, "I will ruin your
reputation; *remember that*; and as you have repulsed me, it becomes
sin, unless *sacrifice* is offered."

Then it goes on to detail a lamb being literally slaughtered in
sacrifice so the destroying angel passes over the Pratt home. Sarah
Pratt wouldn't become food for the Mississippi catfish even though she
refused the advances of the prophet.

"Mrs. Pratt, in a conversation with Mrs. Goddard, observed, "Sister
Goddard, Joseph is a corrupt man; I know it, for he made an attempt upon
me, *in the name of the Lord*. I now detest the man."

But Jo apparently wasn't done with Sarah. She was marked, and Jo wasn't
one to give up on his personal goals.

"Time passed on without further molestation, until one day, after Mr.
Pratt's return from Europe, Joe called at her new house, and... grossly
insulted her again, by stealthily approaching her and kissing her. (Oh
how funny, boys will be boys, won't they...) This highly offended her,
and she told her husband, Colonel Orson Pratt, who was highly incensed,
and gave Joe a SEVERE REBUKE. Joe observed, "I did not desire to kiss
her; *Bennett made me do it!*" Joe couldn't come to the "*extreme
unction"* over that intelligent lady; she was far above his polluted
breath, his ribaldry, low vituperation, calumny, and detraction. *He
lied to her in the name of Israel's God.* Let the base blasphemer
remember that, and weep!\... If Joe Smith is not destined for the
*Devil*, all I can say is, that the *duties* of a devil have not been
clearly understood."

Bennett made me do it. Does his rascality know no bounds? Here we can
see Sarah Pratt and her sexuality being weaponized by high-ranking men
in the church who clearly didn't care about her reputation or personal
well-being.

Bennett's expose revealed what had been going on with Sarah Pratt in a
way that was shocking to a lot of people. It was also reported that
Bennett's friendship with Sarah was more than just friendship, which
threw her character further into question. Sarah Pratt was now the talk
of Nauvoo and rumors are absolutely merciless.

As a result of this information coming to light and the
newly-circulating rumors, Joseph Smith's journal entry for July 15, 1842
reveals how some of this conflict was impacting other prominent figures
in Nauvoo leadership.

"15 July 1842 • Friday

Friday 15th. This A.M. early a report was in circulation that [O. P.
\[Orson
Pratt\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#9624355436395305332) was
missing. A. letter of his writing was found directed to [his
wife](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#9779388987636793283) stating
to the effect that he was going
away;[282](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#2933313742770235646) Soon
as this was known Joseph summoned the principal men of the city and
workmen on
the [Temple](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#6016114866664622476) to
meet at the [Temple
Grove](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#12130350443350445258) where he
ordered them to proceed immediately throughout
the [city](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#2421018683915506921) in
search of him lest he should have laid voilent \[violent\] hands on
himself."

The next day's issue off the Warsaw signal revealed that it was
generally understood in Nauvoo that Orson Pratt was in a mental state
that he was a danger to himself.

"We understand by the Stage Driver from Nauvoo last evening, that O.
Pratt had suddenly disappeared from the city. He left a paper containing
his reasons for leaving \-- which were, the treatment his wife had
received from Jo. Smith, and some other matter concerning the policy of
the Church. It was supposed in Nauvoo, that he had committed suicide,
and about 500 persons were out on the search for him."

The initial search didn't turn him up. He eventually wandered back into
town the next day, he just needed a small respite to let things blow
over. However, Orson Brain-power Pratt's unknown whereabouts didn't stop
Jo from using the opportunity to further vilify Bennett, obviously never
acknowledging his own role in causing this meltdown. After the day of
searching, the brethren gathered in the grove near the Temple that was
nearing a full floor in its construction process. This is the substance
of the sermon Jo gave, literally while Orson Pratt was assumed dead by
his own hand because the splash damage caused by clandestine spiritual
wifery.

"After considerable search had been made but to no effect a meeting was
called at
the [Grove](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#5295080738847352528)
where Joseph stated before the public a general outline of [J\[ohn\] C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#17464432133384094858)s
conduct and especially with regard to [Sis P \[Sarah Bates
Pratt\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#9722930644180556992) Met
again in the P.M. when [Hyrum
\[Smith\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#17825356142792872783) & [H\[eber\]
C. Kimball](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#5445336858503513945) spake
on the same subject after which Joseph arose and said that he would
state to those present some things which he had heard
respecting [Edward](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#14964482138458044070) & [D\[avid\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#7398279655504222803) Kilbourn
being conspiring with [J. C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#15595427163333799907) in
endeavoring to bring \[p. 127\] a Mob upon us, and as Mr [E.
Kilbourn](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#15848865430663202068) was
then present he would have the privilege of either admitting or denying
it. Question by [E.
Kilbourn](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#18301875978822075276) "Who
did [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#9979960803462618721) tell
that I and my brother were conspiring to bring a mob upon you" Answer
by Joseph "He told me and he told
\[blank\] [Allred](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#6434783558882550796) and [Orson
Pratt](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#13159915990220077227)s
wife & others". Q by [E
Kilboun](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#2842555188605105864) "Where
did he say we were going to bring a mob from". Ans. by Joseph.
"From [Galena](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#2372273376876715673)". [Mr. Kilbourn](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#4755975809216689185) then
arose and said, "I was conversing with my brother this morning and he
said he had never
seen [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#11654414246183058867) since
he had us before him last year for conspiracy. I have only seen him
twice since last fall, I saw \<​him​\> once then. I was
going to [Galena](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#16832088120349337199) about
2 weeks ago. The Boat I was on stopped at the upper Landing place and I
came ashore a little while. The first person I saw
was [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#4557069863463951492);
we entered into conversation, but there was no mention made of mobs. I
have not seen him since. I always
regarded [Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#10269186438117609804) the
same as I regard you (Joseph) and thought you were pretty well matched.
If any one says that I have conspired to bring a Mob upon you it is
false". The meeting was then peaceably dismissed. [O.
P.](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#15405737257713887911) returned
at night. He was seen about 2 miles this
side [Warsaw](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#474199450736477038);
set on a log. He says he has concluded to do right."

The rumors of conspiracy at the hand of Bennett in league with a number
of other Nauvoo elites infected the minds of the initiated elite. Was
Bennett working with others to bring a mob into town and put down the
Mormon problem? Who was working with Bennett? Would Bennett align with
Missouri officials and affect an arrest of Jo and other elites,
extradite them to Missouri, and force them to answer on the old Missouri
charges resulting in all of their deaths? A lot of unknowns floated
about Nauvoo.

Jo continued to conduct business as business necessitated. He went about
the next few days dealing with buying and selling property, looking at
land to hew timber for more construction projects being added to the
waiting list.

Then, on July 22, 1842, Orson Pratt briefly got access to Jo on the
pulpit, a confrontation ensued.

"At the stand conflicting with [O. P. \[Orson
Pratt\]](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#8985006431900674204) and
correcting the public mind with regard to reports put in circulation
by [\[John C.\]
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#12207037097947406801) &
others. In the P.M. a petition was prepared and singed \[signed\] by the
citizens praying
the [Governor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/45#247893311233028720) not
to issue a writ for the Prest"

This is what led to the confrontation, from the HoC 5:68. It was a vote
swearing to the good character of Joseph Smith, to which Orson Pratt
voted in the negative. Here it is:

"Resolved, that having heard that John C. Bennett was circulating many
base falsehoods respecting a number of the citizens of Nauvoo, and
especially against our worthy and respected Mayor, Joseph Smith, we do
hereby manifest to the world that so far as we are acquainted with
Joseph Smith, we know him to be a good, moral, virtuous, peaceable and
patriotic man, and a firm supporter of law, justice, and equal rights;
that he at all times upholds and keeps inviolate the constitution of
this State, and of the United States, which resolution was adopted by
the numerous assembly.

The next section was cut from the B.H. Roberts HoC, but Vogel has
painstakingly reconstructed the HoC from the original documents, which
reveals details of the conflict between Orson Brain-Power Pratt and Jo
concerning this resolution.

"Two or three, voted in the negative.

Elder Orson Pratt then rose and spoke at some length in explanation of
his negative vote. Pres. Joseph Smith spoke in reply---

Question to Elder Pratt, "Have you personally a knowledge of any immoral
act in me toward the female sex, or in any other way? Answer by Elder O.
Pratt, "Personally, toward the female sex, I have not."

Elder O. Pratt responded at some length. Elder B. Young then spoke in
reply, and was followed by Elders Wm. Law, H.C. Kimball, and Pres. H.
Smith. Several others spoke bearing testimony of the iniquity of those
who had calumniated Pres. J. Smith's character.

Meeting adjourned for one hour.

(this not removed from B.H. Roberts) The assembly came together in the
afternoon, and about 800 signed the foregoing petition presented by the
city council to Governor Carlin.

The way this was initially recorded can't be trusted, and Roberts
proceeded to remove it anyway from the History of the Church when he
compiled it in the early 1900s. Transparency vs. whitewashing or hiding
history happens in degrees, people, it's not binary.

And the petition was drafted, indeed, pleading Governor Carlin to not
issue a writ of arrest to Jo. Before getting to that, I just wanted to
briefly mention something that slipped my gaze back in late June of
1842. From Vogel HoC 5:45

"My clerk, Willard Richards, being about to leave me for a season,
committed the business of my office to Elder William Clayton, who had
been engaged with him for a few weeks past."

William Clayton's appointment to Jo's personal clerk will figure heavily
into the rest of Jo's life and ministry for the 2 years that remained.
That was just a brief point to mention, my apologies for that important
point in Mormon history slipping my notice.

The petition was drafted, and a number of men signed their own
affidavits concerning the conduct of John C. Wreck-it Bennett. The
primary petition to Governor Carlin reads in part:

"Concerning those statements made by \[Bennett\] against Joseph Smith,
we know that they are false. Joseph Smith has our entire confidence; we
know that he has violated no law, nor has he in anywise promoted
sedition or rebellion; nor has he sought the injury of any citizen of
this or any other place. We are perfectly assured that he is as loyal,
patriotic and virtuous a man as there is in the State of Illinois, and
we appeal to your excellency if, in three years acquaintance with him,
you have seen anything to the contrary?"

Of course, Lilburn Boggs was still recovering and Governor Carlin had a
writ of extradition sitting on his desk from Boggs to arrest Jo and
Pistol-Packin' Porter Rockwell. Carlin had right to be afraid that the
Mormons might rise up against his rule as had happened in Missouri with
Governor Boggs in 1838. How would that look to his political career?
Would he even survive for reelection should the Mormons rise up that
year, or would they assassinate him as they apparently had Governor
Boggs? A lot of scary questions weighed on Governor Carlin's mind at
this time. The end of the petition, signed by 800 Nauvoo Mormons, said
the following:

"Having heard a report that your excellency had called upon several
companies of militia to prepare themselves and be in readiness, in case
of emergency, we would further ask of your excellency, that if the State
or country should be in danger, that the Nauvoo Legion may have the
privilege of showing their loyalty in the defense thereof."

It's a lot harder to raise up a militia to fight the Mormons and arrest
Jo Smith when half that militia is the Nauvoo Legion beholden to Joseph
Smith above any secular rule of law. The petition concludes with this:

"We have the fullest confidence in the honor, justice and integrity of
your excellency, and feel confidence that we have only to present our
case before you to insure protection, believing that the cries of so
many peaceable and patriotic citizens will not be disregarded by your
excellency.

We therefore ask you, as the chief magistrate of this State, to grant us
our requests, and we, as in duty bound, will ever pray."

Signed by 800 citizens, and the entire Nauvoo Mormon elite, except for
Orson Pratt.

The Mormons didn't just send that single petition to Governor Carlin, it
included affidavits from Daniel H. Wells, Hyrum Smith, George Miller,
Elias and Francis Higbee, William Law, and a substantial article
published in the Times and Seasons about John C. Bennett which sought
solely to assassinate his credibility. It was whacking a wildfire with a
single blanket, none of these affidavits actually stopped the Bennett
meltdown from melting down, it was purely damage control. Each affidavit
sought to refute each of Bennett's claims, but the collective weight of
Bennett's expose and the unstoppable force of all the rumors which had
been slowly infecting Nauvoo was too much for these affidavits to abate.
They were all published in the Times and Seasons.

The Hyrum Smith affidavit is possibly the most fascinating of the bunch.
I've read the substance of it before on the show, but never within the
context of the Bennett meltdown. This is where Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff
Smith claimed that Bennett had medicine to produce an abortion should
pregnancy result from the practice of spiritual wifery, because of
course that was a common result! It also claimed Bennett had told a
woman he wanted to acquire as a spiritual wife that he'd be happy to
poison her husband if she consented in order to put him out of the way.
According to Hyrum Smith, Bennett attempted to poison the man, but he
wouldn't take the "medicine" which would result in his death, so Bennett
was therefore unsuccessful.

Years later, Sarah Pratt corroborated the substantive portion of Hyrum
Smith's abortion claim when interviewed by Wilhelm Ritter von Wymetal in
his expose of 1886.

"Mrs. P.: 'You hear often that Joseph had no polygamous offspring. The
reason for this is very simple. Abortion was practiced on a large scale
in Nauvoo. Dr. John C. Bennett, the evil genius of Joseph, brought this
abomination into a scientific system. He showed to my husband and me the
instruments with which he sued to 'operate for Joseph.' There was a
house in Nauvoo, 'right across the flat,' about a mile and a half from
the town, a kind of hospital. They sent the women there, when they
showed signs of celestial consequences. Abortion was practiced regularly
in this house.'

Mrs. H. 'Many little bodies of new-born children floated down the
Mississippi.'"

That Mrs. H. is Lucinda Morgan Harris, the widow of William Morgan who
was likely killed in 1826 for publishing his expose of Masonry. Jo had
apparently taken her to wife while in Nauvoo. When Sarah Pratt
confronted Lucinda Harris about Jo's spiritual wife system, Lucinda
said, "How foolish you are! I don't see anything so horrible in it. Why,
I am his mistress since four years!"

Sarah Pratt continued in Nauvoo as a pariah. The Wasp joined the Times
and Seasons in publishing affidavits supposedly disproving the claims of
Bennett. Eventually, Stephen and Zuriah Goddard, friends of the Pratts,
were coerced into signing an affidavit published in the Wasp directed to
Orson Pratt that linked Bennett and Sarah Pratt's relationship as being
more than just friends.

"One night they took their charis out of doors and remained there we
supposed until 12 o'clock or after; at another time they went over to
the house where you now live and came back after dark, or about that
time. We went over several times late in the evening while she lived in
the house of Dr. Foster, and were most sure to find Dr. Bennett and your
wife together, as it were, man and wife."

Sarah confronted the Goddards about this statement, which is also found
in Wymetal's 1886 expose.

"In his endeavors to ruin my character Joseph went so far as to publish
an extra-sheet containing affidavits against my reputation. When this
sheet was brought to me I discovered to my astonishment the names of two
people on it, man and wife, with whom I had boarded for a certain
time... I went to their house; the man left the house hurriedly when he
saw me coming. I found the wife and said to her rather excitedly: 'What
does it all mean?' She began to sob. 'It is not my fault' said she.
'Hyrum Smith came to our house, with the affidavits all written out, and
forced us to sign them. '*Joseph and the Church must be saved*,' said
he. We saw that resistance was useless, they would have ruined us; so we
signed the papers.'"

When I look at Sarah Pratt I don't see an angry apostate. I see a woman
who stood up to a patriarchal system and was caught up in the cogs of
the mighty protectionist machine and spit out with her character and
reputation forever tarnished. Read what FairMormon has to say about her,
the character assassination has been effective even 130 years after her
death.

"When the Bennett imbroglio blew up a year later, Joseph may have been
reluctant to publicly try Sarah---if he had proposed a plural marriage
to her, the revelations that a hostile adulteress could make would be
disastrous."

Adulteress? Really? The rest of the article is consistently unkind to
Sarah Pratt's allegations and completely washes away the allegations of
Bennett's abortion. MormonPolygamyDocuments.org, Brian Hales brain dump
website says this about Sarah Pratt after reprinting her statement about
the abortion house.

"Sarah claimed many things about Joseph Smith throughout her lifetime,
but this is probably one of her most over-the-top statements. She made
other allegations that contradict more reliable historical data. For
example, when asked about the statement, "Joseph had eighty wives at the
time of his death," Sarah Pratt replied: "He had many more, my dear sir;
at least he had seduced many more, and those with whom he had lived
without their being sealed to him, were sealed to him after his death."
Currently there is no evidence for "eighty wives" or "many more" than
eighty as Pratt alleged."

This entire article is precisely indicative of why so many people are
quickly frustrated with Brian Hales scholarship. It's presentist to
claim that there's no evidence for Jo having more than eighty wives
because the lines between celestially sealed wife, vs spiritual wife, vs
mistress in 1842 weren't clear. It's only later scholarship that has
postulated the documentable 33 something wives of Joseph Smith, but when
these relationships were happening, so few were actually documented as
having been sealed to Jo, and all of his one-night stands simply can
never be substantiated with documentation because they were never
initially recorded. Look, a powerful and wealthy guy of Jo's temperament
has relations with a lot of women and actively seeks to cover them up.
What documentation would historians expect to find to prove that these
relationships happened to any degree? Oh, Joseph Smith begrudgingly
practiced celestial marriage only after being threatened by an angel
with a drawn sword, he never wanted to be married to 33 women, it was
purely out of religious obligation. Sure, the documentation exists to
support those conclusions, but those documents are viewed through a
presentist lens to exonerate the holy and pious prophet of any
wrongdoing or accusations of adultery.

The facts of the matter are that Jo slept with a lot of women, multiple
independent credible records exist claiming that Bennett performed
abortions to conceal the inevitable result, and documentation never
existed in the first place concerning the scope and reach of all his
sexual escapades. Jo tried to apply a holy veneer to his nefarious
conduct at the time and historians ever since have been toeing the party
line. The real-world impact of his concerted efforts to conceal his
adulterous practices is revealed when we consider Sarah Pratt and her
public character when she opposed Jo and ventured to speak out in
opposition and reveal what was going on. The statements she made weren't
done proactively, they were done because her name was weaponized by
people who didn't care about her or her wellbeing and she was forced to
make public statements to clarify what happened. She made the statements
and the assassination of her character is all that remains in the
collective memory of Mormon history.

To illustrate that point, consider the way the rest of Hales' article
concerning Bennett, Pratt, and abortions flippantly dismisses her
multiple statements. It concludes with postulating an inaccurate date of
1843 instead of 1842 for Bennett's signed statement that Jo never taught
Bennett about plural marriage, but you'll recall that statement was
explicitly made under duress, according to Bennett's expose. Then it
goes on to say this:

"Of less importance to critics, but of great significance to Nauvoo
polygamists is that Joseph taught that plural marriage was to 'multiply
and replenish the earth' (cites D&C 132 from one year after the Bennett
meltdown for that justification). Abortion produces the opposite result.
The duplicity, if it had ever occurred, not only would have created
confusion amongst his morally-conservative followers but also would have
branded him a hypocrite. No such allegations are found in the historical
record."

Yes! because any documentation was suppressed at the time and NEVER
would have survived the century and a half of archivists even if such
documents were ever made in the first place.

"While Bennett may well have performed abortions on women that he and
his 'spiritual wifery' followers may have impregnated, extrapolating
that he also performed abortions of Joseph Smith's plural wives is not
supported by the historical record. (EXCEPT FOR THE LACK OF
DESCENDANTS!!!) It also does not answer the question: 'Where are the
children from all of Joseph's plural wives if intimate relations
occurred commonly in those relationships?'"

That's the end of the article. That's it! Yes, where are the children
from all of Jo's plural wives?! That's a wonderful question! You see,
anything that Bennett was branded with inevitably splash damages Jo.
Because polygamy is so often only viewed through the lens of doctrinal
justification and the male practices of propositioning specific women at
specific times, Hales and plenty of historians have completely
disregarded the slain characters lying in the bloody wake of clandestine
polygamy. Sarah Pratt was unwillingly victimized by the machine that
labeled her an enemy of the religion. She was an apostate as soon as she
refused Jo's advances. It was only downhill from there.

Why won't women speak out about sexual misconduct when it happens? I
just don't get it! This! THIS IS WHY! Whether or not Sarah had any
sexual relations, consensual or otherwise, with Jo or Bennett simply
doesn't matter because she was already judged in the court of public
opinion. She was a martyr to transparency with the prophet's sexual
indiscretions. She made credible allegations when petitioned by Bennett
grinding his axe. She suffered for it for the rest of her life and her
entire legacy has been tarnished with the label of anti-Mormon, all
because she was a victim of Jo's relentless sex drive.

And look, this is a case where the coverup becomes worse than the crime.
Let's grant that she and Jo had consensual relations at some point in
1841, just for the sake of argument. They were violating adultery laws
which often carried punishment of castration or imprisonment, but those
were notoriously unregulated in the day because you'd have a lot of
politicians and business men with no balls, especially after they
visited Nauvoo, so let's just be real about that. Where the real issue
comes into play, and there's no law against it, was the secrecy and
violation of trust, and the poor decisions made to preserve that
secrecy. Jo attempted to seduce Sarah after he'd sent her husband 4,000
miles away on a mission to a foreign country. Presumably, most of these
relationships were without the knowledge or consent of Emma, and this
relationship sure smacks of Orson Pratt not knowing about it. Too many
secrets, too many lies to keep those secrets. Then, when the extent of
Jo's improprieties was revealed, he sicked the attack dogs on everybody
speaking out about it. He'd spent so much time at the pulpit lying about
his relationships and the order of god-approved marriage that he
couldn't just go back on everything, right? It was a sunk-cost fallacy.
He'd lied to thousands of people for over a decade now, he couldn't
possibly come clean with his new and everlasting order of marriage
without suffering a major loss of followers and a major blow to his
public reputation.

That's the point here. Jo was an impulsively dishonest human being. He
lied about everything and that started long before he ever claimed to
have gold plates given him by an angel. There is nothing in this man's
legacy worth veneration. He built cities, gathered masses of followers,
and his religion settled the west, what an ambitious and inspiring
legacy... But it's all built on a lie! It's all a lie. Joseph Smith is
deserving of many things, but veneration and reverence are not befitting
this human being, not when we consider the damage left in his wake, not
when we look at the lives he ruined like Sarah Pratt.

What Jo was deserving of, is what happened next.

HoC 5:80

"Monday \[August\] 8 \[1842\]---This forenoon I was arrested by the
Deputy Sheriff of Adams county and two assistants, on a warrant issued
by Governor Carlin, founded on a requisition from Governor Reynolds of
Missouri, upon the affidavit of Ex-Governor Boggs, complaining of the
said Smith as "being an accessory before the fact, to an assault with
intent to kill, made by one O. P. Rockwell on Lilburn W. Boggs," on the
night of the sixth of May, A.D. 1842. Brother Rockwell was arrested at
the same time as principal."

Governor Carlin had finally made good on the arrest warrant called for
by Governor Reynolds on the sworn affidavit by Lilburn Boggs. An
extradition writ was soon to follow. Jo and Pistol Packin' Port were
headed to Missouri to answer for the attempted assassination of a public
figure during his State Senatorial campaign, and you can bet they plan
on convicting on those old Missouri charges of arson, robbery, and high
treason. Porter Rockwell had probably taken on some new responsibilities
since Bennett's departure as Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion, he was
one of the primary leaders of the Danites, the underground military arm
of Mormonism, in some respects a leader of the Daughters of Zion. He was
Jo's fixer and had incredibly high status in Nauvoo. Jo was the head of
everything else in the city. They were two of the most powerful men in
Nauvoo Mormonism, and now, they're headed for the gallows.

B2C

Alright everybody, I'm going to give you a quick forecast of what the
next several weeks hold for the show. I'm recording this week's episode
2 weeks in advance. When last week's episode aired I was in Missouri for
the John Whitmer Historical Association conference. I'm hoping I was
able to conduct an interesting interview or two with historians to share
with all of you. When you're listening to this, I'm currently in
Germany! Annie and I have been planning a month-long trip to Europe for
over a year now and the time has finally come. We'll be spending our
first two weeks in Germany, then week number three is Manchester U.K.
for the QED conference.

QED is basically THE premiere atheism/skepticism/science education
conference in the world. I'll be giving a brief presentation at
skepticamp on October 12^th^ about the European mission of the Quorum of
Apostles and the impact it had on American history in addition to the
first-ever Mormon panel discussion at QED with panelists Greg Rattey and
Cara Santa Maria, chaired by Andy Wilson of InKredulous podcast and
organizer of the event. If you happen to be going to QED I'd love to
meet you there and chat it up at the hotel bar. Then the final week will
be in Ireland for a conference Annie will be attending where I get to
relax and tour around distilleries and old bars in Dublin and Galway.
It's a busy month coming up and we've been stoked about it for quite a
while now, but I'm not leaving all of you high and dry because there
ain't no rest for the wicked. I have episodes stockpiled for the month
of October and they'll be releasing on the regular schedule. I've also
built up a backlog of Patron only episodes reading through Bennett's
history of the Saints that'll be releasing every Monday on
patreon.com/nakedmormonism. Don't say I don't work hard for you guys,
lots of 16-hour days for the past few weeks.

So, with all this travel coming up, next week's episode and the week
after that will be a two-part interview I did with a Mormon history
researcher where we cover polygamy before and after the Bennett
Meltdown. Johnny brought a lot of research with him and I hope you'll
enjoy those episodes as much as I enjoyed conducting the interview
because it puts a lot of the crucial higher-level trends together in a
cohesive timeline. The week after that I'm going to try and air an
interview that I hope I conducted while at the John Whitmer conference.
There are a few people I'd like to nail down whose work I've been
consuming in hopes they'll talk to me about it, but we'll have to see.
Then the week after that, which is October 25^th^, I'm planning on
putting together a travel log to release on this regular feed along with
a little bit about how awesome QED was. That's for the regular feed, but
there are perks if you're signed up on patreon.com/nakedmormonism!
Everybody who supports the show will be getting a number of travel logs
for the whole month of October about some of the cool history sites
we're visiting and I'll share the history I've learned that I know
nothing about right now. In Germany alone, we'll be in Dresden for WWII
history, Munster for Munster rebellion history, and Wittenberg for
Protestant Revolution history, among many other amazing places. This is
my first trip to Europe and we're making the best of it. I desire all to
receive those travel logs, but only those worthy few who pay their
tithes to be a member of the NaMo club. You know how these things work,
people, it's nothing new, I just won't ask about your masturbation
habits or damn you to outer darkness for speaking out against Ground
Gnomes LLC.

Then, we'll pick back up on November 1^st^ where we left off with Jo and
Port in custody of the Adams County Sheriff amidst the fallout from the
Bennett Meltdown. What happens next?! Guess you'll have to wait a month
to find out, unless you're listening to this in the backlog then you can
just jump ahead and I'll tell you all about how awesome the trip to
Europe was.

Alright, I guess that's about it. Thank you everybody for listening. I'm
signing off for a month. I'll have access to wifi most nights, but I
don't plan on doing social media stuffs, because, why? A vacation with
social media isn't a vacation, how can my mind be in Europe with my body
when it's tethered? I'll be back on the clock starting with QED October
12. So, I'll leave the keys to the kingdom in the trustworthy hands of
our social media genius, Julie Briscoe and part with a huge thanks to
her for keeping it lively over there. Of course, follow her on twitter
at theRealEmmaHale, you'd be surprised the conversations that unfold
among Emma, Porter Rockwell, Brigham Young, and the disembodied head of
John C. Bennett.

Thanks so much to all of you for tuning in.

I hope to talk at you next time, here on the Naked Mormonism Podcast.
