---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 109 - Boggs Bites Port’s Bullet
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-109-boggs-bites-ports-bullet/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-109-boggs-bites-ports-bullet
category: History
date: 2018-06-29 04:29:13 +0000
---

This week’s episode is brought to you by 49dollarsites. Visit
49dollarsites.com and enter promo code ‘Naked’ to get a free upgrade to
the pro package when you sign up.

Well well well clip

Ep 109 – Boggs Bites Port’s Bullet

On this episode, Nauvoo has a lot of secrets to hide. We talk about
Orrin Porter Rockwell and his trip to Missouri in May 1842. We discuss
his “confrontation” with Governor Lilburn Boggs, of which Boggs was none
the wiser until he awoke days later with multiple gunshot wounds. We
cover Port’s quick flight from Missouri back to Nauvoo after the
assassination attempt. John C. Bennett apostatizes and begins his public
derisions of Joseph Smith and Mormonism. Pistol Packin’ Porter Rockwell
confronts Wreck-it Bennett about rumors Bennett was spreading about Jo’s
hand in the assassination.

Links:

Check out this week’s sponsor and use promo code ‘Naked’ when you sign
up\!\!\!  
<https://49dollarsites.com/>

Warsaw Signal 1842  
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1842.htm>

Lilburn Boggs Wiki  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lilburn_Boggs>

The Wasp May 1842  
<https://archive.org/stream/TheWasp18421843/The_Wasp_1842-1843#page/n25/mode/2up>

Baltimore Sun 31 May 1842  
<https://www.newspapers.com/image/364967868/?terms=boggs>

Times-Picayune 29 May 1842  
<https://www.newspapers.com/image/25554775/?terms=boggs>

Brooklyn Evening Star 23 July 1842  
<https://www.newspapers.com/image/117466777/?terms=boggs>

Times and Seasons May 1842  
<https://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/digital/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/9857>

Seattle Atheists talk  
<https://www.meetup.com/seattle-atheists/events/252222177/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Would they be good Masons? Could the Mormons keep a secret? Nauvoo had a
lot of secrets to keep. Adultery running rampant, fraudulent land deeds
more prolific than legitimate deeds, a paralegal army at the tip of Jo’s
puppet-strings, never enough jobs forcing crime rates through the roof,
all the while Talos is gathering more pieces under the cover of night.
Nauvoo may have appeared to be a burgeoning settlement of people just
trying to make their way in the world, but what lived in the shadows was
far more insidious.

Politics were becoming of increasing importance to the Mormons and
Joseph Smith.

Thomas Coke Sharp published an article titled Jo Smith’s Proclamaiton on
Jan 26, 1842 detailing the conflicts generated when politicians would
curry favor with the Mormon voting bloc.

“As we expected, the wonderful document issued by the Prophet, directing
his followers how to vote, has created great shaking amongst the dry
bones of the politicians. On one hand, the Whigs say it is a high-handed
and insolent production, and on the other, the Democrats say umph\!
scarcely knowing whether to approve or condemn.   
  
We are not prophets, but we will hazzard the prediction who tampers with
the Mormons, or condescends to sycophancy in order to insure their
support, will, in less than five years, lose more by the withdrawal of
the confidence of the people than it is now in the power of the Mormons
to give. But still, notwithstanding this is apparent, such is the
\[devotion\] with which men kneel to \[----- --- that\] there are those
who are willing \[to worship a\] Money-Digger as a god, if \[---- -----
they\] can secure their political \[---------favors\].  
  
The Sangamo Journal, heretofore a friend of the Mormons, has had its
tune wonderfully changed by the proclamation. [Hear
him](http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/IL/sang1842.htm#0121) --   
  
"The Proclamation which follows this preface, is in itself most strange
and daring -- perversive of the privileges of a citizen\! It would not
be so, were the signer anyone else than the person whom it represents --
JOSEPH SMITH. Mr. S. is supposed by his followers to be a Prophet of the
Most High God. Whether he is or not, is no matter of dispute at present;
but as such Prophet he is held in the highest veneration and respect by
his followers, whom he leads easily by the belief of his high calling.
Now, as long as Mr. Smith keeps near the sanctuary and prophecies of
religion, he is guileless of offence, but when he enters upon the duties
of a civil office of the State, and as a Lieutenant General, speaks to
his friends, whom \[as a\] PROPHET he can command, and uses the
religious influence he possesses, under the Military garb he has
acquired, he becomes a dangerous man, and must look to the consequences.
If he would take a friendly advice, we would say, let some Joshua, the
son of Nun, lead the armies, and let him stick to interpretation and
prophecy -- and for we do assure him upon an honest belief, that his
situation in Illinois, is far more dangerous than ever it was in
Missouri; if he undertakes to take Mahomet's part, his only prototype,
save Mokhauna, and play the warrior and patriot \[sic -prophet?\].   
  
As for the Supreme Judge, who is so all powerful with the sect, let him
look to it that ambition does not overlap its mark."

Jo just kept gaining more and more power. Rising in tandem with the
outside criticisms from those not under Jo’s prophetic spell were the
rampant rumors of polygamy circulating in and out of Nauvoo. Stories
involving not just Jo, but his uppermost elites.

Jo took an occasion to address the increased level of rumors without
ever speaking explicitly to what he was referring.

“President Hyrum Smith spoke concerning the elders who went forth to
preach from Kirtland, and were afterwards called in for the washing and
anointing at the dedication of the House, and those who go now will be
called in also, when this Temple is about to be dedicated, and will then
be endowed to go forth with mighty power, having the same anointing,
that all may go forth and have the same power, the first, second, and so
on, of the Seventies, and all those formerly ordained. This will be an
important and beneficial mission, and not many years until those now
sent will be called in again. He then spoke in contradiction of a report
in circulation about Elder H. C. Kimball, Brigham Young, himself, and
others of the Twelve, alleging that a sister had been shut in a room for
several days, and that they had endeavored to induce her to believe in
having two wives. Also cautioned the Sisters against going to the
Steamboats.

President Joseph Smith spoke upon the subject of the stories respecting
Elders Kimball and others, showing the folly and inconsistency of
spending any time in conversing about such stories, or hearkening to
them, for there is no person that is acquainted with our principles
would believe such lies, except Sharp, the editor of the *Warsaw
Signal*.”

HoC Vogel 4:561-2

The allegations of Brigham Young and Heber Kimball locking a young woman
up in the Red Brick Store and coercing her into a polygamous
relationship would end up proving to be true, as far as historians can
tell. Jo and the leadership were walking a fine line of public
declarations which were completely opposite to their private conduct.
This contrast existed in nearly every piece of Mormon culture.

Jo believed the powers of religion and state to be separate and
distinct, yet as a religious leader he spent ungodly amounts of time
with politicians promising to give them the Mormon vote. Jo thought the
Missourians were a depraved and ignorant group of people hell-bent on
destroying Mormonism, yet Jo first sought to establish Jackson County as
the Mormon promised land and declared the Mormons would make war against
the Missourians. Jo repeatedly preached one man and one wife and even
included a revelation stating it explicitly in the 1835 edition of the
Doctrine and Covenants, yet he was having affairs as early as 1834. Jo
taught temperance and advocated for the banning of alcohol for
non-medicinal purposes in Nauvoo, which provision passed the city
government, yet in less than a year’s time he was operating a bar out of
his own house.

Countless examples could be placed in front of us when Jo’s private
actions were exactly what he frequently preached against, and the
hypocrisy of this is what caused a lot of strife within Mormon
leadership ranks.

However, there were those loyal to Joseph. A character who has largely
operated within the shadows of our historical timeline, only making a
rare appearance from time to time, is a childhood friend of Joseph. This
man was short, stout, and liked his whiskey. His eyes were portals into
black oblivion, and his receding hairline only revealed more of the
demonic features comprising his face as the years wore on. He may have
been 8 years Joseph’s junior, but he and Jo were rough and tumble
scrappy young lads causing trouble in Palmyra since their friendship was
forged. If you messed with Jo, you’d have to keep an eye on your back
for his best friend and closest personal body guard, Orrin Pistol
Packin’ Porter Rockwell.

Porter Rockwell had been the leader of the Destroying Angel company of
the Danites throughout the 1838 Missouri-Mormon conflict. He’d
participated in looting and burning the non-Mormon towns around the
Mormon settlement and he never left Jo’s side as the standoff continued
to heat up between the Missouri militia and the Mormon mob, ending in
Jo’s arrest. Rockwell had escaped toward Quincy on the night of the
surrender, so he wasn’t rounded up with the other 60+ Danites who were
arrested and thrown in Jail awaiting treason and conspiracy charges.
Rockwell eagerly awaited the prophet’s return from Liberty Jail in the
makeshift Mormon settlement on the banks of the Mississippi.

Jo may have had a legion of bodyguards, thousands of Mormons to answer
the leadership’s cry for help at a moment’s notice, a Nauvoo Legion with
over 1,000 militiamen, and an underground squad known as the Danites in
Missouri who essentially became the police force of Nauvoo, but one man
was essentially required to be within eyeshot of the prophet as active
head of Jo’s secret service, Pistol Packin Port was a powerful asset.
Why would a Christian minister like Joseph Smith need an active
bodyguard detail? Jo wasn’t an Alexander Campbell, he was a Mohammed to
his generation. Jo had a lot of enemies.

Chief among his enemies was a man born in Kentucky in 1796, Lilburn
Boggs, Governor of Missouri from 1836 to 1840, and elected to the
Missouri state Senate in 1842 for his masterful handling of the Mormon
War which made him very popular among the anti-Mormon Missourians.
Lilburn Boggs issued the Mormon Extermination order bringing the
conflict to an end, the Missourians knew Boggs wouldn’t handle any
similar anti-majority uprising with kid gloves like he had the beginning
of the Mormon conflict. Boggs meant business. Thomas Reynolds had taken
the office of Governor from Boggs and was tasked with bringing Jo and
the Mormons to justice for the conflict. He’d issued the arrest warrant
for Joseph Smith back in mid-1841, but Jo was able to get a writ of
habeas corpus, which Justice Stephen A. Douglas, later presidential
election opponent to Abraham Lincoln, granted the writ and called for
the release of Joseph Smith. Douglas would later become an opponent to
the Brighamite Mormons, Lincoln used Douglas’ flip-floping to score
cheap points against Douglas in speeches and debates.

Needless to say, Jo had a lot of friends in high places, but far more
enemies in higher places. How does a pious prophet of the Lord deal with
his sharpest critics? Thomas Sharp, editor of the Warsaw Signal, was met
with public derision. Jo and his propaganda outlets constantly
criticized Sharp for articles he wrote in the Signal. Other less public
figures who criticized Jo that couldn’t gain enough attention were
easily ignored. Every public figure has to understand that sometimes
haters are gunna hate, and Jo rarely responded to petty attacks. But, in
the case of Grandison Newell, a wealthy businessman and creditor of Jo’s
in Kirtland, Jo commanded some Mormons to sit outside his house and
assassinate Newell, the attempt failed but the fact was brought up in
the court proceedings against Jo which forced him and Rigdon to flee the
state of Ohio.

Lilburn Boggs was public enemy \#1 in the eyes of the Mormons. Orrin
Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell’s wife, Luana Rockwell, was 8 months
pregnant with their fourth child. Port and Luana wanted to have the baby
with Luana’s parents, then living in Independence, Missouri and in late
February, Port packed up a wagon with a few provisions, sent the other 3
kids to live with some family friends for a few weeks, and they departed
Nauvoo.

Luana and Porter Rockwell arrived in Independence, Missouri at the home
of Luana’s parents probably in early to mid-April, immediately after
which, Luana gave birth to their fourth child.

Whether Port had a mission underpinning this trip to Missouri, or
whether he took initiative, it can never be known. Port got it in his
mind that public enemy number one, Lilburn Boggs’s, time had come to an
end. Boggs may not have been governor of Missouri anymore, but if Jo was
going to run for POTUS in 44, Boggs as a prominent senator would have
been a thorn in Jo’s paw. Whether out of retribution for past
indiscretions, or out of political need moving forward, it would be much
better for Jo and the Mormons if Boggs weren’t an issue to deal with.

On the evening of May 6<sup>th</sup>, 1842, Pistol Packin Porter tucked
his wife away in bed as she nursed the new baby. Port loved horses, he
was an expert rider. He’d just got a new job in Independence taking care
of a valuable stallion in order to financially support his family for
the brief time they would be staying in Missouri until the baby was old
enough to travel back to Nauvoo.

With his wife and new baby tucked away for bed, Port saddled up and rode
the couple miles under the cover of nightfall to the home of Ex-Governor
Lilburn Boggs. It was dark and a cool spring-time shower masked any
noise but turned dirt roads into a nasty brown glue of Missouri
springtime mud. It was probably cold, early May in the Midwest at night
with high humidity can get a bit chilly. Porter Rockwell approached the
home of Senator Lilburn Boggs with one thing on his mind, Boggs wouldn’t
see the sun rise the next morning.

This shot had to count. Port knew he’d only get one and have to
high-tail it out of there to escape being witnessed. He loaded the
pistol with a hot load, lots of extra powder and buckshot to make sure
when Boggs was hit there would be no chance of his survival. The
Destroying Angel of Mormonism, the great Son of Thunder, crouched
outside the office of Boggs’ home, peering in the window, eyeing his
prey.

Boggs poured his glass of whiskey for the evening, unfolded that day’s
paper, and sat comfortably behind an ornate wooden desk reserved only
for the wealthiest of government officials of the 1800s. Boggs was none
the wiser an assassin lay in wait just outside the window. Porter
expertly took aim at Boggs through the window. He’d fired at human
targets before, and this certainly wouldn’t be the last time, but this
target wasn’t moving or trying to run away, just unsuspectingly sitting
still in his office reading the paper while his six-year-old daughter
sat on the floor at his feet rocking her infant sister to sleep.

Port saw the back of Boggs’ head lined up in the sight beads of his
pistol loaded with buckshot. He exhaled and held his breath as any good
marksperson does. His finger tingled as it slowly drew back on the
trigger. (clink noise) The hammer crashed into the cap, igniting the
heavy load in the pistol’s chamber. The explosion sent a round of
buckshot crashing through the window. The kick from the pistol was heavy
enough that Pistol Packin Porter must not have been ready for it and the
gun leapt from his hands and plopped lifelessly into the mud at his
feet.

The buckshot hit true to its target. Two small lead balls entered Boggs’
head, one implanting in his skull, the other breaking his jaw, and two
more balls entered his throat, one entering his esophagus which he
swallowed as he gasped in surprise at the gunshot and crashing window
noises as the spell of incredible pain and trauma suddenly overtook his
body, rendering him immediately unconscious.

Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell had done it. He assassinated an elected
public official out of vengeance for the plight of the Mormons in honor
of the cold dead bodies of their brethren still lying in a well near
Haun’s mill just 30 miles from where he presently stood. Port didn’t
even pause to search for his pistol, the mud had swallowed it and every
second he remained was another second he could be discovered or
identified.

Boggs’ teenage son, alerted by the gunshot and shattered window noise
and possibly a cry out from his father, ran into the room to discover
his father leaned back in his chair unconscious with his dislocated jaw
hanging down while a pool of blood formed around his chair. Young Minnie
Boggs was screaming in terror as her mother ran in the room to see her
husband slumped lifelessly back in his chair. She picked up her daughter
and prodded around to make sure she wasn’t hit. Minnie had miraculously
escaped any harm which is even more remarkable considering 13 other
bullet holes were found in the room from the buckshot.

Porter dashed from the shattered window and ran to his horse. He hopped
on and immediately put as much distance between himself and the Boggs
home as his horse could muster. Maybe he rode home as quickly as he
could. Maybe he went to his favorite nearby saloon to establish an
alibi. Boggs had a lot of enemies in Missouri politics, maybe one of his
opponents would be charged with the assassination, the Mormons were such
an afterthought to most Missourians by this point, the war had been over
3 years and almost no Mormons remained in the state.

Bogg’s son yelled for the rest of the family and the neighborhood
physician was summoned as quickly as he could make the trip so late at
night.

From Harold Schindler’s Man of God, Son of Thunder, the best biography
out there about Orrin Porter Rockwell, on page 67:

“Judge Samuel H. Woodson, a neighbor, was the first outsider on the
scene; and moments later, when Sheriff J. H. Reynolds arrived with a
doctor (the first of four that night), Boggs was unconscious and near
death…

Outside the house a crowd gathered at first report of the shooting and
now numbered nearly two hundred persons; one of the spectators searching
the spot where the gunman had stood found traces of footprints in the
mud, and in a partially-filled puddle discovered the gun. Sheriff
Reynolds studied the firearm carefully, but was unable to detect any
identifying mark. It was a “large German holster pistol, chambered for
four shots,” he observed. Three of the barrels were loaded with buckshot
instead of single balls. Reynolds surmised that the recoil of such a
heavy charge had kicked the pistol from the gunman’s grasp, and failing
to find it in the rain, the assassin had fled. While the sheriff mulled
these thought in his mind, a storekeeper named Uhlinger recognized the
weapon as one stolen from his shop.”

Uhlinger later said of the time when the pistol went missing:

“I thought the niggers had taken it, but that hired man of Ward’s—the
one who used to work with the stallion—he came in to look at it just
before it turned up missing\!” That hired man of Ward’s was Pistol
Packin Porter who’d hired on to take care of the valuable horse. The
investigators had their first lead to who the assassin might be.

In the following days, numerous articles and obituaries were printed for
Boggs as he barely clung to life. It was presumed by nearly everybody
that he wouldn’t pull through as he languished in an out of
consciousness for days and hung on by a worn thread for the following
weeks.

Mormon news articles are interesting to watch as the story of Boggs’
assassination attempt started catching fire nationwide. Before reading a
few of them, it’s worth noting the timing here. Rockwell and his wife,
Luana, made it to Missouri in March or April of 1842. They stayed with
Luana’s parents as she delivered their 4<sup>th</sup> child and Porter
went to work for Ward in caring for the valuable stallion. May
6<sup>th</sup>, Boggs was shot, and a mere 2 weeks later Pistol Packin
Porter arrived back in Nauvoo off a Mississippi steamer having
permanently left his wife with their new child back in Missouri. He was
never seen by any of the locals in Missouri after the assassination
attempt and he made the 300-mile journey back to Nauvoo in less than 2
weeks, arriving in Nauvoo 2 days before news of the assassination
reached Nauvoo. Porter actually travelled from Missouri to Nauvoo faster
than the news did. Maybe he heard the townspeople looking for a suspect
and knew that his reputation would put him right at the top of the list
and left town as soon as he thought he might be arrested. Maybe he had
just planned to leave that next day coincidentally. From the
preponderance of evidence following the assassination attempt, it seems
like he was running from his own dastardly deed and the timing of his
immediate travels lends credence to that evidence.

May 14<sup>th</sup>, 1842, Rockwell arrived in Nauvoo with rumors of his
successful assassination following close behind. The next day Jo
preached to the congregation that he’d received word of Boggs’
assassination.

From HoC Vogel edition 5:8

“It was reported in Nauvoo, that ex-Governor Boggs of Missouri had been
shot…

Sunday, 15.--Attended meeting at the Stand. Prest Rigdon preached. News
of the attempted assassination of Governor Boggs was confirmed by
general report, and was mentioned on the Stand.”

Likely from Pistol Packin Port himself, Jo had presumed along with
everybody else in the nation that the assassination attempt was
successful. Here are some articles from around the nation about what had
happened and the confusion which followed.

The St. Louis New Era 11<sup>th</sup> May 1842

“Gov. Boggs was shot by some villain on Friday, 6<sup>th</sup>, in the
evening, while sitting in a room in his own house in Independence. His
son, a boy, hearing a report, ran into the room and found the Governor
sitting in his chair with his jaw fallen down, and his head leaning
back. On discovering the injury done his father, he gave the alarm. Foot
tracks were found in the garden below the window, and a pistol picked up
supposed to have been overloaded and thrown from the hand of the
scoundrel who fired it. Three buckshot, of a heavy load, took effect,
one going through his mouth, one into the brain, and another probably in
or near the brain—all going in at the back part of the neck and head.
The Governor was still alive on the morning of the 7<sup>th</sup>, but
no hopes of his recovery were entertained by his friends, and but slight
hopes from his physicians. A man was suspected, and the Sheriff most
probably has possession of him by this time. The pistol was one of a
pair stolen some days previous from a baker in Independence, and the
legal authorities have the description of the other.”

The St. Louis New Era was wrong, the Sheriff didn’t have the suspect in
custody. He’d fled so quickly that no person could know to halt his
progress on his journey. Rockwell was probably already in St. Louis by
the time that report was published.

Hartford Courant out of Connecticut 24 May 1842

“Ex-Governor Boggs Assassinated—By the last Western Mail, we have the
appalling intelligence of the murder of ex-Governor Lilburn W. Boggs of
Missouri, at his residence at Independence, on the 6<sup>th</sup>
instant. He was sitting alone in his room, engaged in writing, when he
was shot through the window by some villain, who lodged three buckshot
in his head, one of them in his brain.”

The Times-Picayune out of New Orleans 29 May, 1842. Word was spreading
that Boggs may actually survive.

“Gov. Boggs, of Missouri, who was recently shot by an assassin,
according to the last accounts from Independence, was still alive, and
faint hopes were indulged of his possible recovery.”

Boggs was slowly recovering, and a manhunt was afoot and the assassin’s
motives started to take on a life of their own.

The Baltimore Sun 31 May 1842:

“REVENGE.—It is rumored that the attempt to assassinate Gov. Boggs, was
committed by a Mormon, at the instigation of Joe Smith, in revenge for
his treatment of Joe’s sect while Mr. B. was Governor of Missouri.”

It wasn’t long before all kinds of accusations were being thrown around.
Printed in the Brooklyn Evening Star out of New York on 23 July 1842 was
a copy of an article from the Warsaw Signal, Jo’s nemesis, Thomas Coke
Sharp couldn’t help but seize the opportunity for some salacious
articles. He mistook A.P. Rockwood for O. P. Rockwell in his printing,
so I’ve changed the name to Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell as it was
initially intended, even though A.P. Rockwood was the name of a
high-ranking Mormon elite in Nauvoo. Here it is:

“We understand that the very mischief is brewing in Nauvoo, since the
threatening of Bennett to expose the villany of Joe and his satellites.
Several of Joe’s right-hand men have left the church and joined
Bennett’s party. One disclosure, particularly, will prove interesting
and that is in relation to Boggs’s murder. Bennett states that \[O.P.
Rockwell\] started suddenly from Nauvoo about two weeks before Boggs’s
assassination; that he(Bennett) asked Joe where Rock\[well\] had gone,
and that Joe replied that he had gone to Missouri to fulfil prophecies\!
He says further that Rock\[well\] returned to Nauvoo on the very day
that the news of Governor Bogg’s assassination arrived. Since that, the
Prophet has presented said Rock\[well\] with a carriage and horse, or
horses, and he had suddenly become very flush of money, and lives in
style. These statements we give as we received them. It is said that
Bennett has affidavits to prove every fact above stated and will shortly
present them to the world. If this be true, then will but little doubt
remain that Joe Smith was the real instigator of Boggs’s assassination.”

Further articulating just how powerful and malevolent the Mormon kingdom
on the Mississippi had become, the article from Brooklyn continues:

“The Kaskaskian Republican contains a long account of a murder committed
on the 2d of June, upon John Stephenson—a Mormon—and supposed to have
been committed by Mormons who had called upon him for contributions to
build the temple at Nauvoo, and been refused.”

Jo’s Danites in full force to carry out his will by any means necessary.

The article continues:

“We have late information from Nauvoo. Joe Smith anticipates a
requisition upon Gov. Carlin from Gov, Reynolds of Missouri, for his
person; and is determined not to be given up.

He has all the state arms,--some twenty or thirty cannon\[s\]—a large
number of muskets, yagers, pistols and cutlasses—all belonging to the
state, which he is prepared to use against the state authorities if they
shall attempt to deliver him to Gov. Reynolds. Joe reiterates that he
will not be given up—and the Mormons say that the Prophet shall not be
taken while any of them are left to defend him.”

Jo wasn’t just the prophet, he was a theocrat. This article portrays him
as the insidious dictator so many people outside of Nauvoo thought him
to be. You may have picked up on how many times John C. Wreck-it Bennett
was invoked in that previous article. We haven’t spent nearly enough
time on Bennett up to this point. Suffice it to say, as the
assassination attempt of Boggs was in progress throughout the early
spring of 1842, Bennett and Jo had a falling out, likely due to a series
of conflicts leading up to the point of falling out.

We’ll get back to Pistol Packin Porter and the fallout after he shot
Boggs in a minute, but I just want to step back and try to get a more
holistic view of Nauvoo Mormonism in 1842. We’re progressing at a
snail’s pace through 1842. That’s not because we’re just taking our
time because I’m such a windbag and can’t get to the point which
manifests in long episodes every week about nothing, although it could
easily be seen that way. The reason we’re progressing so slowly is
because there’s just so much. I spend all week reading in prep for each
show and it’s a CONSTANT battle deciding what to include and what to
leave out. 1842 in particular is so overwhelmingly active in Mormon
history and I have to be so selective of what we spend our precious time
on. Even then with my selection process, I’m constantly running in to
things that I wish we would have spent more time covering to put
something else in context, we’re running into that right now with
Wreck-it Bennett. We’re about to cover a conversation that Pistol Packin
Porter had with Wreck-it Bennett but it doesn’t make sense without a bit
of context that we don’t have time to cover in this episode.

But, before we do, we’re going to take a quick break to hear about this
week’s sponsor, 49dollarsites.

A couple weeks ago I told you guys that we have a newly revamped website
at nakedmormonismpodcast.com. Our new site is all thanks to this week’s
sponsor, 49dollarsites.com. We got in some feedback of a few things we
needed to tweak over here, for which I dearly thank those of you who did
get in touch, so let me tell you how this went down. I received these
emails asking for features on the site that we hadn’t implemented, and
they sounded like great ideas. So, I put together an email to Hailey, my
project manager over at 49dollarsites.com, and within a few hours, boom
there they were. All the new features were implemented like magic, no
work on my part whatsoever. What’s even more remarkable is the
turnaround time for it. It didn’t seem to matter what other projects
Hailey and her team happened to have on their plate at that moment, I
just sent her an email and it was done. My experience with customer
service with the 49dollarsites team has been absolutely incredible.

Let me just break down what you get when you sign up to have
49dollarsites build your site or revamp an old site for you like they
did mine.

You get automatic hosting and maintenance, which can take a lot more
time than you’d expect, all of it done by the 49dollarsites team.

Search Engine optimized sites so you always appear on the first page of
Google where real traffic happens.

Unlimited updates. Whether it’s one update every 3 months, or 15 in a
week, the team at 49dollarsites has you covered.

Engaging content that looks good. Don’t believe me, look at our new
site, it’s incredible.

Everything is completely 100% custom. They do all the building and you
decide your level of involvement and control over what a user sees when
they access your website.

And most importantly, if you sign up now at 49dollarsites.com and use
promo code ‘Naked’ at checkout, you get a free upgrade to the pro
package which comes with Google analytics, photo galleries, promotional
pop-up plugins, Google maps integration, text animation, and a ton of
other features, all for free when you use that promo code ‘Naked’ when
you sign up.

So, if you’re a small business owner, a podcaster, or somebody who just
needs an awesome and super professional-looking website, go to
49dollarsites.com and enter promo code ‘Naked’. Once again
49dollarsites.com promo code ‘Naked’ at checkout to get your free pro
package upgrade. Don’t be like me and waste so many precious hours of
your time that you’ll never get back building and maintaining your own
site, let the professionals take it from here.

Alright, let’s get back to the show…

We’ll be covering Wreck-it Bennett in depth in the coming weeks to get
at the heart of the conflict arising between him and Jo. By late May and
early June he’d resigned his position as Mayor of Nauvoo and Jo had
taken the mantle on himself. Once again, we’ll cover that in depth
coming soon. 1842 is so incredibly busy. Bennett had spent a bit of time
gathering affidavits in Nauvoo of people wanting to implicate Jo in
criminal activities, greatest of which was polygamy. Bennett would soon
publish his expose, History of the Saints. Included in that expose were
his pieces of evidence that Jo took an active role in making sure Boggs
felt the wrath of Jo when he crossed the Mormons. Jo’s actions prior to
the assassination didn’t help exonerate the prophet of such accusations
by any stretch of imagination.

Jo’s younger brother, Crazy Willey Smith, had started his own newspaper
outlet since the death of his younger brother, Don Carlos, in order to
radically propagandize the level of publications coming out of Nauvoo.
The Wasp, it was called, took on anybody writing articles in opposition
to the Mormons, and Thomas Coke Sharp of the Warsaw Signal was a
frequent target of Crazy Willey’s Wasp propaganda.

The Wasp was quite gleeful to see Boggs suffer at the end of an
assassin’s gunbarrel with articles like this, tacitly implicating Jo
in the assassination plot.

28 May, 1842, reprinting an article from the Quincy Whig, but what comes
after it is astonishing:

“Lilburn W. Boggs late Governor of Missouri, was assassinated at his
residence in Independence, Missouri, by an unknown hand… There are
several rumors in circulation in regard to the horrid affair.—One of
which throws the crime upon the Mormons—from the fact, we suppose, that
Mr. Boggs was governor at the time, and no small degree instrumental in
driving them from the State. Smith too, the Mormon Prophet, as we
understand, prophesied a year or so ago, his death by violent means.
Hence, there is plenty of foundation for rumor. The citizens of
Independence had offered a reward of $500 for the murderer.—Quincy
Whig.”

Jo did give that prophecy, also that Governor Carlin of Illinois would
find himself in a ditch, which never did happen. In response to these
rumors that Jo had given a prophecy that Boggs would suffer a death by
violent means, within a year’s time, I might add, Jo penned the
following to the Quincy Whig.

“In your paper,… you have done me manifest injustice in ascribing to me
a prediction of the demise of Lilburn W. Boggs,… by violent hands. Boggs
was a candidate for the State Senate, and I presume fell by the hand of
a political opponent, with “his hands and face yet dripping with the
blood of murder;” but he died not through my instrumentality. My hands
are clean and my heart pure, from the blood of all men. I am tired of
the misrepresentations, calumny and detraction, heaped upon me by wicked
men; and desire and claim, only those principles guaranteed to all men
by the constitution and laws of the United States, and of Illinois. Will
you do me the justice to publish this communication and oblige

Yours respectfully, Joseph Smith.”

Yes, Boggs was a public figure. His office of Governorship over Missouri
was hotly contested in the 1840 election when he was unseated by
Governor Thomas Reynolds. His run for Missouri State Senate was equally
controversial, with voters largely siding on opposite sides of the
Mormon issue and how Boggs had handled it. He did have political
enemies, but he wasn’t a controversial figure in any other regard beyond
the Mormon issue. Included in that same article in the Wasp was a letter
to the editor of the Hawk Eye out of Missouri which stated “Boggs,
although so strongly accused by these renegades (Mormons), was one of
the most inoffensive men I ever knew. I knew him well and for years, and
I did not know with the exception of the Mormons, that he had a personal
enemy on earth.”

Yes, Boggs botched the Mormon war. Look, you have a public official who
caused an entire population to be removed from their homes and seek new
lives in a new state as refugees of religious persecution. The Mormons
HATED Boggs. Jo and Rigdon had both frequently preached against Boggs’
mobocracy both in Missouri and in Illinois after the exodus. They blamed
Boggs for everything. The assassin also had no plans on Boggs surviving,
malicious murder was his intent. Mormons had motivation, Porter Rockwell
had opportunity. Whether acting of his own volition based on the fiery
sermons given by Mormon leaders, or acting under direct order from the
prophet, the evidence seems to show that Pistol Packin Porter was the
dastardly knave who committed this heinous act. The next article from
the Wasp exhibits the glee felt collectively by the Mormons that Boggs
had finally suffered the wrath of God. It was a letter to the editor and
therefore anonymous, and it extensively refers to the previous letter
published in the Hawk Eye from Missouri.

“The fact is, their is no proof that a Mormon was in Missouri with an
evil intention when Boggs was shot three hundred miles above St. Louis;
and the Hawk Eye had no thought of doing more than injuring and
insulting an innocent people, who had never laid a straw in his way,
when he wrote the above frothy, slanderous article.

The most wonderful development is, that it appears Jo Smith has made
several threats against Missouri. The public can hardly be gulled by
such foolish libels. Boggs is undoubtedly killed, according to report;
but who did the noble deed remains to be found out.”

The editor of the Wasp must have known this article was a bit too much
and concluding by adding this:

“We admit the foregoing communication to please our correspondent, no
that we have any faith that any one has killed Governor Boggs. The last
account we have received is that he is still living and like to live;
and if he has been shot at all it was by one of his own negroes.”

So many explanations out there. It was a political opponent, it was one
of his slaves, it was General Atchison in retaliation for his and Boggs’
interactions during the Mormon war. They’re all red herrings. All those
explanations were bandied about as seemingly more probable explanations
than Port doing the ‘noble deed,’ yet the evidence was never contended
with. Porter Rockwell had opportunity, intent, motivation, and a color
of character which made him feel justified in vengefully taking the life
of an elected official. Arguments claiming it wasn’t Rockwell, even to
this day, don’t stand up to the abundance of evidence, especially
considering developments which followed the attempt.

Hopefully from the next few passages I’ll be reading from Harold
Schindler’s biography of Porter Rockwell will satisfy any questions
about whether or not Jo had explicitly commanded Rockwell to commit the
crime or if Port was simply acting of his own volition.

“On top of this clamor over the shooting came the biting voice of John
C. Bennett, who, having resigned his position as mayor because “his
whoredoms and abominations were fast coming to light,” began sniping at
Joseph from a multitude of directions. The prophet, meanwhile, deemed it
wise to assume the mayor’s office himself.

Determined to destroy Joseph for publicly disgracing him, Bennett
composed a series of sensational letters for publication in the *Sangamo
Journal* exposing the prophet and his secret doctrine of spiritual
wifery, among other things. He also told what he knew of the Boggs
affair. Bennett said Rockwell had been sent to kill the man on Joseph’s
orders. “In the spring of the year Smith offered a reward of five
hundred dollars to any man who would secretly assassinate Governor
Boggs.” And after the attempt was made, Bennett related, “Smith said to
me, speaking of Governor Boggs, ‘The *Destroying Angel* has done the
work, as I predicted, but Rockwell was not the man who shot; the Angel
did it.’” When this statement circulated, Orrin Porter Rockwell found
himself with a sobriquet little to his liking. He had become, in the
eyes of many, “The Destroying Angel”.

Bennett began blowing the whistle on Jo commanding Rockwell to commit
the assassination, and he would have been one of the few who would have
the insider’s knowledge about the situation. His biases confound so much
of his expose which discussed this situation extensively from pages
278-83, but much of the information stands alone as facts where the
interpretation of those facts reveal the biases. Schindler is accurate
when it comes to Pistol Packin Porter being called ‘The destroying
angel’. The origination of that name came from the 1838 conflict in
Missouri. When Jo organized the Danites he broke them up into separate
troops, each with their own names. The Destroying Angels was the name of
the group headed by Rockwell. After the exodus to Illinois, the Danites
went completely underground and were no longer utilized the way they had
been in Missouri. That was all because the Mormons had their own
state-sanctioned militia which was armed from the state armories by
Wreck-it Bennett. After the assassination attempt is when the name “The
destroying angels was changed to call Pistol Packin Porter simply, “The
Destroying Angel.”

“Even the stoical Rockwell was vexed by the deadly gossip Bennett’s
correspondence had evoked, and he was determined to put a stop to it.
Seeking out the loquacious apostate in nearby Carthage, Rockwell brushed
past three visitors in Bennett’s parlor and confronted his antagonist
with the stories being spread in Nauvoo. It took some moments for
Bennett to overcome his surprise at the unexpected appearance of a man
he knew to be a Danite, but in typical fashion the erstwhile
soul-brother of the Saints attempted to bluster his way out of the
unpleasant situation; he found Rockwell was not to be sidetracked.
Gesturing at the trio of strangers, he asked Bennett for a private
conversation, and was answered with, “If you have anything to say, you
can say it in front of them\!”

“It’s a personal affair,” Rockwell retorted.

After a moment’s hesitation Bennett led the way to another room.

Once they were alone, Rockwell turned to his accuser. “Doctor, you don’t
know who your friends are. I’m not your enemy and I don’t want you using
my name in your publications\!”

“Joe Smith and *all* of his friends are my personal enemies,” Bennett
snapped in reply.

Rockwell’s tone hardened: “I’ve been told you said Joseph gave me fifty
dollars and a wagon for shooting Boggs.” Without waiting for an answer,
Rockwell continued, “Now hear me well, Doctor Bennett. I can—and I
will—whip any man who tells a cursed lie like that about me. Now\! Did
you say it or not?”

Bennet ran his tongue over his lips and thought for a moment. “No, I
didn’t say that. I said—and I’ll tell it to your face—you left Nauvoo
about two months before Boggs was shot. And, you came back the day
before the report of the attempted assassination reached here; two
persons in Nauvoo said you told them you had been in Boggs’s
neighborhood.”

“Oh, I was there all right,” Rockwell said curtly. “But if I shot Boggs,
they have got to prove it. I never did an act I was ashamed of, and I do
not fear to go anywhere that I have ever been. I’ve done nothing
criminal\!”

Startled by the sudden outburst, Bennett hastily concurred. “Certainly
they’ve got to prove it. I know nothing of what you did, I wasn’t
there.”

Before Bennett could say more, Rockwell interjected: “If you say that
Joseph Smith paid me to shoot Boggs—I’ll be back\!” (Pistol Packin
Porter was the first to use the terminator meme) There was no mistaking
the implication. Satisfied that Bennett understood him, Rockwell marched
from the room. In Nauvoo, Rockwell clambered into his elegant new
carriage and whipped the fine team forward. It was true the equipage had
been a gift from Joseph upon Rockwell’s return from Missouri; the
prophet said he gave the present to his friend, “to enable him to convey
passengers from the steamboat landing to the temple and back.””

So yes, it seems Rockwell picked up that $500 reward Jo was rumored to
offer for the assassination of Boggs. He was rolling around in a new
wardrobe in his pimpin brand new carriage which was used as a taxi
service in Nauvoo from the waterfront to the center of town or the
Nauvoo Mansion once it was completed. Schindler goes on to postulate
that Port’s taxi service wasn’t so much convenient transportation as it
was an easy and covert way to spy on newcomers into town. Who better to
keep an eye on visitors from the outside than Pistol Packin Port
himself?

By July of 42, the outside public was clamoring to get Port and Jo back
in jail, and once again, existential threat gripped the Mormon kingdom
on the Mississippi. By late June, Boggs had recovered sufficiently to
begin administrative duties and continue his Senatorial campaign, with
newfound sympathy of the constituents for the assassination attempt. He
issued an affidavit:

“Lilburn W. Boggs, who being duly sworn doth depose and say that on the
night of the 6<sup>th</sup> of May, while sitting in his dwelling, in
the town of independence, in the county of Jackson, he was shot with
intent to kill, and that his life was despaired of for several days, and
that he believes and has good reason to believe from evidence and
information now in his possession, that O. P. Rockwell, a citizen or
resident of the state of Illinois, is the person who shot him on the
night aforesaid, and the said deponent hereby applies to the Governor of
the State of Illinois, to deliver the said O. P. Rockwell to some person
authorized to receive him and convey him to the county aforesaid, there
to be dealt with according to law.”

Armed with this affidavit and an arrest warrant from Governor Carlin of
Illinois, Missouri state constables entered the city of Nauvoo with a
writ of extradition, ready to arrest childhood pals, Jo and Port.

Governor Carlin was in a tough position here. He owed his duty to the
government and his fellow brother in the Governorship, Boggs, even if
Boggs was no longer Governor, but Carlin was also good friends with
Joseph and Emma Smith. After a lovely dinner party, Jo had sent this
letter to Carlin on 30 July, 1842.

“I cannot let this opportunity pass without tendering to you my warmest
thanks for the friendly treatment my lady as well as those with her
received at your hands during the late visit, and also for the friendly
feeling breathed forth in your letter. Your excellency may be assured
that they are duly appreciated by me, and shall ever be reciprocated…. I
shall consider myself and our citizens secure from harm under the broad
canopy of the law under your administration. We look to you for
protection in the event of any violence being used towards us, knowing
that our innocence with regard to all the accusations in circulation
will be duly evidenced before an enlightened public.”

But, a signed affidavit from and ex-Governor who was a Senatorial
candidate stating that somebody in his state attempted to assassinate a
public official was something Governor Carlin couldn’t simply ignore.
He’d shown a lot of favor to the Mormons thus far and he was personal
friends with a number of the Mormon elites, but if he didn’t act upon
the writ of arrest request by Boggs, that would be a bit too much
blatant corruption to ignore by the populous. Governor Carlin of
Illinois was in a tough situation.

He couldn’t help but issue his writ of extradition, to do otherwise
would be neglectful of his elected office and could jeopardize his
future political standings.

Monday 8 August, 1842 HoC 5:80

“This forenoon I was arrested by the Deputy Sheriff of Adams county and
two assistants, on a warrant issued by Governor Carlin, founded on a
requisition from Governor Reynolds of Missouri, upon the affidavit of
Ex-Governor Boggs, complaining of the said Smith as “being an accessory
before the fact, to an assault with intent to kill, made by one O. P.
Rockwell on Lilburn W. Boggs,” on the night of the sixth of May, A.D.
1842. Brother Rockwell was arrested at the same time as principal. There
was no evasion of the officers,…”

Once again, just like the same time last year, Jo was in the captivity
of the Sheriff and constables of Adams County facing extradition to
Missouri where he would certainly be locked up, face trial for the
Mormon war in 1838, and now have conspiracy to assassinate an elected
public official added to the charge. This arrest likely spelled the end
for Joseph Smith. Should he face a court for all his illegal practices,
it would be the gallows or firing squad for him, there’s no way around
that fact. Pistol Packin Port would get the death penalty too for his
involvement in the Danites and his attempted assassination.

But, Jo was quick on his feet. He used a convenient little clause in the
Nauvoo Charter, which we covered on episode 66, when the charter was
drafted and episode 89 when Jo used it for the first time, which allowed
the Nauvoo Government to issue a writ of habeas corpus to override any
warrant for arrest issued by any other government body or official. Jo
applied to the Nauvoo Master in Chancery for a writ of habeas Corpus.

“…the Municipal Court issued a writ of Habeas Corpus according to the
constitution of the State…. This writ demanded the bodies of Messrs.
Smith and Rockwell to be brought before the aforesaid Court; but these
officers refused to do so, and finally without complying, they left them
in the care of the Marshal, without the original writ by which they were
arrested, and by which only they could be retained, and returned back to
Governor Carlin for further instruction, and Messrs. Smith and Rockwell
went about their business.”

And just like that, Jo and Port were free to go about their business.
There’s a reason we titled the Nauvoo Charter episode God Mode Jo, he
put in the perfect combination of cheat codes to create a little place
for himself which made him completely protected from any outside laws.
It was the Vatican in Illinois; the Mormon theocracy was beginning to
morph into a life of its own outside the legal control or oversight of
Governor Carlin or any legal authorities in the area. Jo simply couldn’t
be touched. He spent a bit of the rest of the summer of 1842 actively in
hiding from the governments of Missouri, Illinois, and possibly even
Iowa, although Iowa attempting to prosecute Jo was likely just rumors.
All the while, Jo had the Nauvoo Legion with something like 2,000 armed
soldiers lying in wait to spring him from captivity if a writ of habeas
corpus wasn’t honored or if a posse of constables did happen to get
outside the borders of the city with Jo in custody.

We’ll continue to follow these developments as we progress. While the
Boggs debacle may have resolved itself for Jo by the end of August 1842,
Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell wasn’t quite so lucky.

Jo was arrested or appeared in court 42 times in his life. That’s a
staggering number. I get how that can be waved away, right? He was a
prophet and people didn’t like him and the religion of Mormonism so they
endlessly persecuted him by any means possible. Those frivolous lawsuits
were merely one way the prophet was persecuted. Gaining a fuller
understanding of the circumstances surrounding these lawsuits leads me
to be baffled by the fact that people believed Joseph Smith to be a holy
pious mouthpiece of God. Sure, we can even grant that he was a man of
God, but still a fallible man. But how far does that exception go? I
mean that excuse can get rid of accusations of Jo’s intemperance,
possibly even infidelity masquerading as a new and everlasting covenant
of celestial marriage, but does that exemption still apply to Jo being a
crime lord? Can a fallible person be a mafia don while still being a
prophet of benevolent God? From the available evidence Jo essentially
coordinated the assassination of a government official while he was a
fugitive of multiple states he could never set foot in again or else
he’d face indefinite imprisonment or the death penalty. Jo didn’t have
skeletons in his closet, he lived among an army of rotting corpses that
he didn’t even try to hide in a closet.

Nauvoo Mormonism is as brazen and unabashed as Jo ever got in his entire
ministry. He became Mayor of Nauvoo in spring 1842 after his falling-out
with Wreck-it Bennett, he was the executive authority of all civil and
ecclesiastical matters in Nauvoo. Nothing happened in Nauvoo without
Jo’s knowledge or approval. He clung to complete and total control of
everything with white knuckles. Anytime a situation would arise which
threatened his ever-increasing power, he’d manufacture some situation to
extricate himself from the situation and absolve himself of any legal
guilt or liability.

We’re so far beyond the question of whether or not Jo was a divinely
inspired prophet of God, he was a tyrant with a lust for power that
would lead him to his end. In just 2 years’ time, he would be running
for President of the United States, petitioning Congress for 100,000
soldiers to take the west from the remaining Native American tribes, but
it wouldn’t stop there. He sought to truly construct a sovereign
theocratic state in North America. If Mormons knew even the smallest
fraction of who Joseph Smith truly was, Mormonism wouldn’t be a thing.
His character and conduct were offensive to non-Mormons across the
nation during his life, and even if we say the 1800s in America were a
different time, Joseph is still a horrible human being by any objective
standard of measurement.

If we can’t infer that conclusion from his conduct alone, consider the
people he surrounded himself with. We have Bloody Brigham Young who was
a notorious racist, sexist, dictator of Utah Mormonism and cared more
for the almighty dollar than he ever did a single human life. Heber the
Creeper Kimball was Brigham’s best bud and shared many of the same
character flaws. Hyrum Smith was universally loved by the Mormons, but
his character was just as abrasive as Jo’s behind closed doors as the
opportunist he was. Wreck-it Bennett was likewise an opportunist, using
the doctrine of spiritual wifery to sleep with as many women as would
grant him audience. Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith even publicly accused
Bennett of propositioning a woman to be his plural wife and when she
refused on the grounds of not wanting to be accused of adultery, Bennett
allegedly attempted to poison her husband to put him out of the way.
Then we have Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell, a hardened and evil human
being. By the Utah years, Brigham called on Ol’ Port a number of times
to make a problem go away. The problem usually got worse when Port got
involved and Wild Bill Hickman was usually called in to clean up the
mess, but Port was a ruthless and murderous outlaw with almost no
redeeming qualities.

If Jo’s conduct isn’t a proper indication of his character, just look at
the character of the people he surrounded himself with. He wasn’t the
holy and shining beacon of righteous piety among a sea of depravity, he
was the lowest of them while simultaneously being above them all atop
his religious pyramid. Joseph Smith was a deplorable human being. The
clean streets of Nauvoo couldn’t conceal his true character. He wasn’t
led by God, he was led by the dictates of his own self interests from
day one. History is full of people worth veneration, Jo should be at the
absolute bottom of that list.

Squatters

2 Free Sunstone 3-day tickets, send an email.

NaMo Home Evening with Colleen of MHH
