---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 113 - Mormon Theocracy with Will Bagley pt.1
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-113-mormon-theocracy-will-bagley-pt-1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-113-mormon-theocracy-with-will-bagley-pt1
category: History
date: 2018-07-25 16:57:37 +0000
---

Hey Brian

File directory:

“Mormon-theocracy” files are just the zencastr backups, you can probably
just ignore them.

“WB Bryce Side 1; WB Bryce Side 2” my side of Will Bagley interview;
Zoom recorder split audio after 2gb file size. It’s 3+ hrs to be split
into 113&114

“WB Will Side” Will side of Will Bagley Interview

“Alma side; Alma Bryce Side” short interview for end of 113

“Weird Alma Revelation” outro music for 113

“113 revised outro” as name says, made to accommodate Weird Alma
interview and outro music

“WB Intro Outros” is only useful for the 114 outro (3:52-5:00)

“Patron pitch 114” is spliced in to beginning of 114 before I say “let’s
get meta with Jo and Brigham Young” You’ll hear the queue in the audio
file.

113

Ep 113 – Mormon Theocracy with Will Bagley pt.1

On this episode, Will Bagley takes us through the Joseph years of Mormon
history and sets the precursor for next week’s episode where the
blueprints Joseph laid are realized by Brigham Young.

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Most of the scripted questions here didn’t even make the recording so
the only pertinent info here is at the head of each episode for your
editing.

My audio recorded for about 8 mins before I started recording his. Good
timestamp sync is me asking him for a “test 123”, but it’s not perfect.
Also, my zoom apparently has a max files size of 2 gb so it split my
audio into two files.

The latency made us talk over each other a lot, that’ll make this edit a
huge pain in the ass, sorry man.

Red highlighted section in intro needs to be cut from audio.

Zencastr took a shit but there’s a good cut back in point to keep Will’s
point contiguous.

Cut 113 after Will says “You got it” with the squatters pub stuff
\~1:20:00

113 has a revised outro with a 5-min interview with weird alma and outro
music for 113 will be one of his songs.

See below for 114…

With how busy everything is leading up to Sunstone and the live show at
Squatters, last week I told you all that I’ll entertain you guys for a
couple weeks while we depart from the regular historical timeline. Well
I’m confident you guys will enjoy what I’ve got in store for you. I’ve
asked our guest to speak freely on the subject today so the explicit tag
is there for a reason folks.

Will Bagley is a BYU educated Western-American historian who David
Roberts called “that sharpest of all thorns in the side of the Mormon
historical establishment.” He’s written more than twenty books on
American history in and out of Mormonism and he’s been a frequent
contributor to Mormon Think and the Salt Lake Tribune and his many
books, including The Mormon Rebellion, So Rugged and Mountainous, and
Blood of the Prophets, have won a number of distinguished awards from
numerous historical societies. I’ve just finished reading Blood of the
Prophets and Will was kind enough to give us some of his time to talk
about Mormon history.

Will Bagley, welcome to the show…

Will, few people are as acquainted with the Mormon historical
establishment as you are in your 25+ years in writing American history.
I want to ask the most pressing question to break the ice here, who made
you angry? What did somebody do to you in church to become such a bitter
apostate and start a career of writing anti-Mormon literature?

Alright, that last question was a bit tongue-in-cheek to point out how
absurd and damaging such thought-stifling questions can be. The real
reason I wanted to talk to you today is two-fold. First, as I’ve been
studying Joseph Smith’s Nauvoo years I can’t escape the slow realization
of just how much Joseph Smith tried to become a theocrat to overthrow
the United States government, it’s a cloud over Nauvoo that requires
wrestling with and I can’t think of anybody better to help us work
through it. Secondly, I’m of the opinion that Joseph Smith didn’t die at
the crescendo of his career, rather he was still on the upwards
trajectory in 1844 during his presidential campaign; however, in his
Utah theocracy, Brigham Young truly seemed to capture what Joseph Smith
was seeking to build in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois. I’m hoping you can
help us process all of this with your incredible wealth of knowledge in
American history. So, let’s just dive right in with Joseph Smith and his
theocratic intentions, realized and potential.

Will, do you think there was a single point when Joseph Smith likely
decided he wanted to become king of the world or was it a slow and
subconscious evolution?

…

I have a closing question concerning Joseph Smith. He’s been
mythologized within the culture of Mormonism. All his mistakes have been
actively scrubbed from the record to exhibit this one-dimensional pious
prophet of the Lord. People who truly study Mormon history have a
completely different model of Joseph Smith than the average
chapel-attending Mormon. With your decades of researching and writing
Mormon history, how can we bring those two disparate models of Joseph
Smith into reconciliation? What do you think are effective ways of
teaching people about who the real Joseph Smith was and is there any way
to mesh these seemingly opposed versions of Joseph Smith in the minds of
the average believer?

Will Bagley, thank you for sharing your wealth of knowledge of Joseph
Smith’s history.

Ep 114 – Bloody Brigham’s Mormon Theocracy with Will Bagley pt.2

On this episode, Will Bagley joins us to share in his specialty, Bloody
Brigham Young. We discuss a brief overview of how the Saints made their
way from Nauvoo to the Great Basin in Mexico territory and the fun
begins. Brigham Young realized Joseph Smith’s dreams of a Mormon
theocracy and truly took it above and beyond anything Jo could have
dreamt up. Be sure to buy Bagley’s book, Blood of the Prophets, which
spawned this entire conversation.

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

114

Begins with story “In some ways, maybe the high point of my career…”
includes phone call and ends with “Joseph is nothing if not compelling…
yeah” total of 12:50 all patron only content.

114 begin with Will “And it is a great story, one thing I’m certain with
Carthage Jail…”

Splice in “Patron pitch 114” before I ask “let’s get meta with BY and
Jo”

Hey everybody, before we get into the meat today, I just wanted to pause
and get real for a moment. This show is made possible by listener
support through patreon.com/nakedmormonism. I love bringing you the
skeptical side of Mormon history and hopefully you enjoy the product of
all the work that goes into researching and creating the podcast. It’s a
tough subject to broach when it comes to podcasts that are free to
download, but it’s a harsh reality that it simply costs money to make
this show and this is a full-time endeavor. I’ll never get rich from
running a podcast, but I’m able to do what I love for a living and
that’s what really matters to yours truly. With that in mind, I want
to ask you to support the show. My ability to grow and develop the
podcast and increase the quality is directly tied to how much financial
support comes from listeners like you. It’s a buck a show, that’s the
price of a breakfast burrito per month for you that makes researching
and reporting Mormon history a living for me. If you’re able to buy me a
burrito a month, I’ll give you a ton of extra content on the patreon
supporter exclusive feed in return. If you support the show, you get
extended ad free editions of the show that usually drop before the
regular feed, you get access to our NaMo book club where I read through
old Mormon texts and provide commentary, our NaMo Home Evenings with
special guests every month, Fracking Bad Movies where Marie and I tear
apart terrible old Mormon movies, and a ton of other content. That
dollar an episode gets you a lot of bang for your buck and, in the grand
scheme of things, you probably won’t even notice the trivial expense.
All you have to do is sign up at patreon.com/nakedmormonism and pledge a
buck an episode to keep me doing what I love, and you get the
deeper-darker side of Mormon history from a skeptical perspective that
you’d never know if this podcast didn’t exist. And of course, to all of
you who are currently supporting the show, please accept my deepest debt
of gratitude for doing so. Thank you for making this show possible. At
the end of this episode you’ll hear something that I hope to do more in
the future which is only possible because of your generous support.
Thank you. With that, let’s get back to Will Bagley so he can give us an
overview for what the coming years of this podcast holds as we quickly
approach the Utah years of Mormon history.

Welcome to episode 114, I’m very excited to bring Will Bagley back to
get into the result of everything we discussed last week.

Will, welcome back\!

Last week you walked us through the theocratic designs of Joseph Smith
which I find very hard to overstate with any combination of words. At
the end of it all, Joseph Smith was killed before he reached his climax
of theocratic dictatorial control, instead the mantle was seized by
Bloody Brigham Young who accomplished such designs.

Let’s get started with Brigham Young by briefly going through his power
grab in August 1844 and his organization of the handcart companies which
eventually landed him and thousands of Mormons in Utah by the early
1850s.

Take us away, Will…

I want to examine a controversial time in Utah Mormon history known as
the Mormon reformation period. Coming from somebody who knows basically
nothing of Utah Mormon history, can you tell me and all of us about the
reformation period?

Given everything we’ve discussed in our conversation I have a few
questions that may only be obliquely related. First off, with all
logistical constraints ignored, if there was one person in all Mormon
history you could interview, who would that be?

After reading Blood of the Prophets, I was completely overcome by just
how powerful Brigham Young and the church is and has been in creating
their own version of history and eliminating complicated truths that
just aren’t that useful. What can be done to bring that power in check
and force the Church and its leadership to come by its history honestly
as seems to be the growing trend recently?

When people start studying Mormon history, it can be very challenging to
navigate the minefield of apologetic history versus legitimate history.
What are some common pitfalls new historians fall into and what can we
do to try and protect ourselves from falling victim to narratives that
obfuscate facts or don’t tell the complete story?

One final point.  I see the landscape of Mormon history and it’s hard
not to be pessimistic.  The Church has teams of historians they’ve
poured millions of dollars into to create a model of Mormon history that
minimizes controversial aspects of its history. If we’ve learned
anything today, it's that the Church has engaged in a constant campaign
to propagandize history and marginalize independent historians. I see
people like Jan Shipps, Ron Walker, and Brian Hales, historians paid by
the Church who will NEVER have to worry about where their next meal will
come from.  Contrast that with people like you, Will, and H. Michael
Marquardt, Dan Vogel, and Cheryl Bruno, Dale Morgan, and a legion of
independent historians who work tirelessly and thanklessly to bring real
Mormon history to light.  You know, there isn’t much money in that. 
They've given up financial security to pursue the truth.  With that in
mind, I want to encourage everyone to buy Blood of the Prophets in print
or audiobook to support this kind of research.  And I'm going to do even
more.  I hope this doesn't embarrass you, Will, but I'm going to take a
portion of my patreon dollars for these past two episodes and donate
them directly to you as an honorarium. Think of it as a speaking fee. 
If any of you take any issue with that, please let me know.  But if you
think it’s a good idea to compensate intellects like Will for their work
and devotion to truth, I encourage you to pledge support over
at [patreon.com/nakedmormonism](http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism) so
we can do things like this more often and make a difference. Hopefully
this will be one way of funneling resources to more independent
researchers of Mormon history and continue to grow and expand the field.

With all that said, Will, what’s your current project and when can we
expect to find it in bookstores so all of us can buy it and keep funding
your awesome research?

Fantastic, do you have any parting thoughts you’d like to leave us with
given everything we’ve discussed?
