---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 107 – Emma Hale Elect Lady'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-107-emma-hale-elect-lady/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-107-emma-hale-elect-lady
category: History
date: 2018-06-15 03:49:33 +0000
---

This week's episode is brought to you by 49dollarsites.com. Use promo
code 'Naked' to get a free upgrade to the pro package when you sign up.

Emma clip.

Ep 107 -- Emma Hale Elect Lady

On this episode, we take a time warp back to episode 2 to revisit an
aspect of Mormon history largely ignored in our timeline to this point,
Emma Hale Smith. Little of her own writings survive the years and she
left no journal or diary. We're forced to construct an image of Emma to
live in our minds through other peripheral mentions in the hand of her
closest friends and associates. We rediscover her timeline with the help
of *Mormon Enigma* and catch up on her story leading up to the formation
of the Nauvoo Female Relief Society.

Mormon Enigma by Newell and Avery\
<https://www.amazon.com/Mormon-Enigma-Emma-Hale-Smith/dp/0252062914>

Emma Hale Smith Bidamon biography\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/emma-hale-smith>

Smith Family\
<https://www.lds.org/ensign/2005/12/family-of-joseph-smith-sr-and-lucy-mack-smith-the-first-family-of-the-restoration?lang=eng>

Lucy Mack Smith biography\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/lucy-mack-smith>

Timeline of Joseph Smith\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/bc-jsp/content/jsp/library/pdf/chart1.pdf>

Fanny Alger\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/plural-wives-overview/fanny-alger/>

Lucinda Pendleton Morgan Harris\
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/plural-wives-overview/lucinda-pendleton-harris/>

Children of Emma and Joseph Smith\
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_Joseph_Smith>

God Awful Movies, Joseph Smith Prophet of the Restoration\
<https://audioboom.com/posts/6884005-joseph-smith-prophet-of-the-restoration>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Blushing Bride, mafia wife. Episode 2 was the last episode we spent any
real air time on Emma Smith and she's only been a passing mention at
best ever since. Why?

Mormonism is a total boy's club. Everything in Mormon history was moved
and influenced by men and they really only dictated their own history
through their own eyes. The women of Mormon history were present, but
scarcely even mentioned in the history books. Most of women's influence
on Mormonism is only learned of by reading through their own journals,
of which there are far fewer than men's own dictated history. But just
saying the Mormon history was created by men therefore the men are all
we talk about is a cop out on my part.

The fact of the matter is, I haven't put enough mental resources into
learning of the women's role and impact in Mormon history. That's a
failing on my part. Just as Mormon history as it's been created is
fairly exclusive when it comes to women's roles, so has our examination
of it. When the source material of history is largely created about the
men, by the men, women's influence is inevitably understudied and
passively relegated to fringe studies of Mormon history. What can we
really learn about history when we don't even consider the role of one
half the population in it? This is a struggle I've only recently
realized and have been actively trying to rectify.

With that in mind, let's spend today talking about the Elect Lady of
Mormonism and give her a proper treatment. Emma Hale Smith Bidamon was a
force to be reckoned with. Through her 74 years of life, 2 marriages, 9
children born, of which only 3 survived her, 3 and a half adoptions, at
least 17 moves through 5 states, never living in a single place more
than 3 years during her marriage to Joseph Smith, multiple heartbreaking
family deaths, and countless trials and errors, Emma was truly a
remarkable human being.

The plethora of documentation we have of Joseph Smith allows historians
the ability to construct complex and diverse narratives of his
personality, often with motives to view him through a specific lens of
being the pious prophet or a charlatan, with the truth of the matter
never being sufficiently captured and likely wildly underrepresented in
every biography of the man.

For historians, Emma, however, is a starkly one-dimensional helpmeet to
the prophet of the restoration. This isn't a lacking in historical
analysis of her so much as a lacking of source documentation to begin
with. She left almost nothing behind. 22 letters between her and Joseph
survive today, and a few letters she wrote after the schism grenade are
known to be extant, but she left no diary or journal, never had a
personal scribe or planning-book, and much of her personality is only
understood through peripheral mentions in letters and diary entries not
about her whatsoever. It wasn't until she was unanimously elected
president of the Relief Society in Nauvoo that her personality begins to
shine through in the minute books, kept by her close friend and
secretary, Eliza R. Snow, with whom she had severe later disagreements.

The one-dimensional historical portraits of Emma have largely been
clouded by her status. She was the emotional support for the prophet
until his death, but later became an outspoken enemy of Brigham Young,
coloring her LDS portraits to be two-faced, or out of focus in an effort
to minimize her overall role in Mormonism. On the other hand, she raised
the prophet of the Reorganization, and RLDS sources have painted the
holy and pious narrative deserving of wife and mother of the true Mormon
prophets to an extent that leaves her true humanity utterly detached.

The true Emma Hale isn't somewhere in the middle of these narratives,
for that the narratives would have to be better defined to be
dichotomous. She was a fascinating and dynamic character of Mormon
history and I've found even her best biography, Mormon Enigma, to be
woefully lacking in representing who the true Emma Hale Smith was. Such
is the constraint of sticking to facts and historically verifiable
truth. The historical record of Emma Hale Smith Bidamon only plots a few
monumental points of her life, while the rest remains speculation based
on those scant few verifiable events and documents.

I'll be relying heavily on Linda King Newell and Valeen Tippetts Avery
today to discuss Emma as the book, Mormon Enigma, is an incredible
biography and arguably the most comprehensive and balanced in the entire
field of Mormon historical studies. Please understand though, I feel
like even Avery and Newell leave a lot to be desired when postulating
Emma's possible motives and true intent as the book is constrained to a
format which wouldn't ruffle feathers in the field of Mormon History,
regardless of denomination. Seemingly in spite of their friendly and
calculated approach, Mormon Enigma was banned in Brighamism. From the
introduction of the book:

"\[T\]he book offended the leadership of the LDS Church in Utah. In June
1985, a month after it received the Evans award, newspaper headlines of
the *Los Angeles Times* announced, "Mormons Forbid Female Biographers of
Smith's wife to Address Church." We were prohibited from speaking about
any aspect of religious or church history in any LDS Church-related
meeting or institution. Church leaders took this action without reading
the book in its entirety or informing us of their decision, and it
remained in effect over ten months. In the wake of the national
publicity caused by the ban, the sales of the book tripled,"

Why? It showed Emma in a light contrary to the simplistic silent and
stoic helpmeet to Joseph the LDS Church had been putting forward for
over a century since her death. It also exhibits a level of inner
conflict within the Smith family, largely due to polygamy, that it seems
the LDS Church was terrified to confront. Such a prominent individual in
Mormon history, and an honest and full-throated biography about her was
banned. Mormon history is nothing if not fun, coupled with equal amounts
of drama and controversy.

Let's get a refresher on Emma Hale prior to her meeting Joseph Smith.
Emma grew up in a relatively wealthy household in Harmony, Pennsylvania
on the banks of the Susquehanna river. The descendant of Mayflower
immigrants and daughter of a Revolutionary War veteran, Emma led a
charmed life. Father Isaac provided for the family's comfortable living
as an active hunter and Mother Elizabeth provided a pleasant home and
education for her children, making side-income boarding strangers
passing through, working jobs in the area, or until they could build
their own homes in the largely uncultivated area of Harmony as it was
late to become colonized.

In her earliest years, Emma was home-schooled by Elizabeth, as were the
majority of the Hale children, but Elizabeth was quite well-educated and
was able to teach the Hale children reading and writing at a very early
age, elevating them above their peers.

Elizabeth's role in the formation of Emma's mind cannot be overstated.

"Though Isaac worked hard and steadily, Elizabeth also contributed to
the family income. She opened her home to boarders, operating an inn or
tavern, to provide the family with extra cash to augment produce from
the garden, farm crops, and meat from the wilds. She taught her
daughters to make candles from tallow, cure sausages for the winter, and
dry fruit from the orchards. They learned to knit and sew, to patch and
mend. Quite likely the results of their homemaking skills appeared as
entries in the annual agricultural fair."

By age nine, the town built its first schoolhouse log cabin. Emma and
the Hale children began attending Caleb Barnes' school services and
furthered their education. During Emma's late teens an interesting
occurrence happened in Harmony.

"\[A\] distant relative of Emma's, William Hale, had approached Isaac
with a peculiar story. A woman claiming to have powers that enabled her
to see underground had told William Hale that great treasures were
concealed in a hill just northeast of Isaac's house. Persons with such
powers were commonly called "peepers" and many people took them
seriously. William Hale began digging in the specified area. The work
was slow and difficult for a man who had an aversion to hard physical
labor. Not wealthy enough himself to hire help, yet sure there would be
riches to share with a partner, he talked Oliver Harper into financing
the dig. Harper's untimely death suspended the operation for a time, but
exciting rumors about buried treasure still swept through Harmony."

Here enters Josiah Stowell, as we called him many moons ago, Bossman Jo.
He was wealthy and believed Emma's relative when he claimed this
treasure-digging scryer had told him of the buried treasure. Josiah
Stowell, a resident of Bainbridge, N.Y., knew of a visionary family
well-steeped in magic rituals who could peep the treasure and break the
spell which bound it underground. Stowell approached Joseph Sr. and
contracted to have him and a couple of his boys come down to the banks
of the Susquehanna in Harmony and locate said treasure. The Smiths took
advantage of the fair pricing of the Hale tavern and boarded with the
Hale family for a number of weeks while they searched for treasure.

During this time, Jo and Emma cultivated a liking for each other. It
would have been a bustling home filled with treasure-seeking men looking
to make a quick buck, while the Hale women provided meals, tightened
bedding ropes, emptied chamber pots, and probably delighted the men with
their beautiful voices for evening entertainment. Emma was noted
multiple times throughout her life in other accounts as often humming or
singing while she worked and must have had a beautiful voice to do so.

Her musical acumen would serve her well in the Church. Her primary task
and repeatedly disputed over throughout her career as elect lady was to
compile the church hymnals at various points. In fact, the only
revelation in the D&C and likely the only revelation ever given to a
woman in Joseph's Mormon history was directed at Emma:

Book of Commandments 1833 ed. Ch. 26 given July 1830

"it shall be given thee, also, to make a selection of sacred Hymns, as
it shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my
church: For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart: Yea, the song
of the righteous is a prayer unto me."

Not particularly well-known or discussed in popular Mormon history
circles was Isaac Hales' tacit involvement with the treasure-digging. As
Avery and Newell put it:

"Isaac Hale viewed the money-digging activities with conflicting
emotions. On the one hand, his farming experience taught him that the
earth rarely harbored great riches. But when his neighbor, Josiah
Sowell, believed peep stones could reveal hidden treasures and invested
money in the enterprise, Isaac suspected Josiah knew something he did
not. Both men were comfortably well off, but neither was wealthy. If
Josiah Stowell found a fortune under Isaac's nose, the subtle social
structure existing among the local farmers would be altered in Stowell's
favor. It would humiliate Isaac if his lazy relative, William Hale,
found a treasure. Isaac Hale guarded both his options. He allowed the
money digging to take place under his watchful eye but kept himself a
respectable distance from the operation."

When the treasure dig continued to grind on for weeks with only more
dirt for results, as was often the case with scryers, the blame fell to
Jo's shoulders and Isaac probably harbored resentment or ill-feelings
toward Jo from that time forward. This would taint their relationship.
After the treasure digging was abandoned, Josiah Stowell hired Jo on as
a farmhand, giving Emma ample opportunity to spend time with Jo and
continue their courting.

Eventually, Jo proposed to Emma. Isaac Hale gave a total and absolute no
to the proposal, likely due to his observations of Jo's character during
the treasure-digging expedition near his property.

Jo and Isaac's relationship continued to sour and Isaac ended up
famously hating Joseph Smith as Jo continued to steal away Emma for
longer and longer periods of time. While Jo was a ranch hand for Bossman
Josiah Stowell after the treasure-digging trip, Bossman Jo's
nephew-in-law filed a lawsuit which resulted in Jo's 1826 trial where he
was called "the glass-looker" by Justice Albert Neeley.

This development in the relationship between Emma's courtship partner
and her father, whom she devotedly respected must have been incredibly
taxing. This conflict must have played into her decision-making process
when she finally decided to elope with Jo.

After a second proposition and denial, Emma stayed home from Church
while the Hale family went to the local Methodist congregation. Jo
showed up with a boombox blasting 'What is Love' and they immediately
crossed into New York to the town of South Bainbridge and were married
without the consent of Isaac Hale.

Overwhelming trepidation, foreboding doom of familial kinship,
consternation, who knows what it would have felt like to elope with
somebody your father despised. Beyond that, Emma didn't even return home
after they married, Emma and Jo headed straight for the Smith family
farm in Palmyra, leaving behind every personal effect, cattle, and
furniture Emma had accrued over her entire life. She simply said goodbye
to it all.

It must have been a shock to arrive in the Smith home. Joseph Sr., Lucy
Mack, Hyrum and his new wife Jerusha Barden, Sophronia, who was being
courted by a man to whom Jo Sr. was indebted for a land deed, Samuel,
Crazy Willey, Katharine, Don Carlos, and Lucy Jr., all crammed into a
cabin that was maybe 900 square feet combined with two floors. Emma went
from a comfortable and educated living space with her own bed and
furniture, sharing a room with possibly one sibling, to living in a
house less than half the size with 11 other rough and uneducated people,
all while being a newlywed and not even having said goodbye to her
family and all her worldly possessions back in Harmony. We can't know
what this must have been like. We can't possibly put ourselves in Emma's
mind.

She did cultivate a remarkable relationship with Jerusha Barden and Lucy
Mack during this time as they were the eldest women in the house to
provide for all the men of all ages. Lucy loved both of her
daughters-in-law and Emma and Lucy would continue to be extremely close
until Lucy's death in Emma's and Lucy Smith Millikin's care in 1856 in
Illinois.

After receiving a letter from her father and the translation coming to a
halt, Emma and Jo resigned to face the music and move to Harmony. Jo
received the greatest chastisement of his life witnessed by a Smith
family friend when Isaac told Jo that he'd stolen his daughter and he'd
much rather have followed her to the grave than have them married. Isaac
contracted with Jo to sell him and Emma her older brother's home on the
Hale family farm. Emma finally had her own home. Part of the agreement
was that Jo would give up the magick and money-digging business and work
as a farmer to provide a sustainable home for Emma.

Jo may have, for a very short time, worked on the Hale farm doing manual
labor. But soon, his clever wit combined with profound laziness
overpowered his desire to placate his father-in-law, and work on the
authorship of the Book of Mormon began in earnest with Martin Harris.
Financially supported by Not-So-Smarty-Marty Harris, Jo and the pregnant
Emma had great hopes for their future. Translation was progressing, Jo
and Emma's first son, little Alvin, was growing inside Emma.

Then, tragedy struck. NSSM lost the 116 pages, completely obliterating
the financial prospects for Emma to have a secure home and family life.
Then, Alvin was born completely deformed, living a mere few hours before
perishing. The labor nearly killed Emma. She was laid up in bed for
weeks while Jo buried their first infant son and stayed by his wife's
bedside, attending to her every need, probably scared as she was that
she wouldn't recover for the first week of bedridden nightmare fuel.

It was good Emma was near her family at this time. They provided the
emotional support necessary to grind through this very hard time.

Eventually, Oliver Cowdery came to live with the Smiths to get the
translation rolling. Emma was now feeding two hungry young men from any
food they could possibly get their hands on. Because of Isaac's
iron-fisted opposition to their marriage and the Book of Mormon, the
Hales weren't providing any financial support for Emma and Jo.
Eventually, Jo and Ollie went the few miles to Colesville New York to
petition Smith family friend, Joseph Knight Sr. for supplies. They
arrived to find him gone. When Ollie and Jo returned, they found Joseph
Knight Sr. and Emma unloading supplies, beans, bushels of corn and
potatoes, and plenty of other food stuffs from the sleigh. This got
Emma, Jo, and Ollie through the winter of 1828-29. When supplies once
again ran low, Ollie sent a letter to his good friend, D-Day David
Whitmer, asking if they could come finish the translation up there.

David Whitmer's reply was affirmative as he wanted to see this marvelous
work and a wonder come forth under his family's roof. Thus, Emma was
once again uprooted from her family farm to accommodate Jo's whims.

There's no telling what the Hale family relationship was like at this
time. Undoubtedly Isaac and Elizabeth Hale loved their daughter and
wanted the best for her, but they simply couldn't agree with the life
Joseph Smith was leading. Emma loved her husband and must have been
completely torn apart by the conflict between Jo and her family.

In June of 1829, David Whitmer showed up with a wagon to move Ollie and
Jo, along with some of the Smith's possessions to Fayette, New York. For
a brief time, Jo just left Emma in Harmony. Just left her. No reasoning
why she didn't immediately join Jo and Ollie in Fayette, she was just
stuck in Harmony for a little while. Eventually she made her way up to
Fayette for the very final stages of the translation process.

The copyright for the Book of Mormon was filed on 11 June 1829, and
authorship of the Original Manuscript was completed two and a half weeks
later about. Emma and Jo moved back to Harmony bearing good news that
the manuscript was completed. Ollie and others in Fayette toiled with
creating the printer's manuscript. The good news didn't smooth ruffled
Hale feathers and Isaac still refused to support Emma and Jo.

Desperate for money with supplies running extremely low, Jo caught wind
of a rumor that Canada was buying copyrights for history books. He sent
missionaries on two separate occasions to find a purchaser for the Book
of Mormon copyright as it was being printed. Desperation to provide for
a wife and fulfill an overdue \$200 contract on the home in which the
Smiths lived extended Jo to extremes. Undoubtedly this would have been a
challenging time for Emma and extremely strenuous on their relationship.

A challenging aspect of Jo and Emma's history cropped up, which we
covered in Episode 21 -- 1 Prophet, 2 Trials... 3-some anybody? Jo was
arrested and tried for being a disorderly person. When it was found that
the court didn't have jurisdiction, he was released and arrested again
on the steps of the courthouse to be taken to the proper courthouse.
During this second trial, Bossman Josiah Stowell's daughters were called
to testify against Jo. They were asked explicitly if Jo had ever acted
inappropriately towards them, likely based on rumors only, but for every
false rumor surrounding the prophet, the truth was usually even more
salacious.

"Between Joseph's trials, his lawyer, John S. Reid, rode up to see Emma.
He said Emma's face was "wet with tears . . . \[and\] her very
heartstrings \[were\] broken with grief." The local judicial systems
were unable to convict him, but nevertheless Joseph had received rough
and contemptuous treatment and had been persecuted for what he believed
and taught. Dismayed and shaken by the ordeal, Emma and Joseph went
quietly back to Harmony." Mormon Enigma p. 33

Not evidenced in the historical record is how Emma's interactions played
out with her family at this time. Everything from major fights tearing
at the fabric of the familial ties, to the microaggressions evidenced in
subtle daily interactions, her relationship with her family degraded.
None of the Hales would ever convert to the Church.

Further evidence of the chasm between Emma and her family is exhibited
by developments after the Church was founded. Hingepin Sidney Rigdon and
Edward Party-boy Partridge made their way first to New York, then to
Harmony to meet the young prophet in late summer 1830. Jo agreed to
moving the Church to fertile religious soil in Kirtland, Ohio, delivered
a revelation inciting the first Mormon mass-exodus, and Emma was forever
bound to a life as the Elect Lady of Mormonism.

Elect lady

"Emma, my daughter in Zion, a revelation I give unto you, concerning my
will: Behold thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady,
whom I have called. Murmur not because of the things which thou hast not
seen, for they are withheld from thee, and from the world, which is
wisdom in me in a time to come. (Gold plates)...

4 And the office of thy calling shall be for a comfort unto my servant
Joseph, thy husband, in his afflictions with consoling words, in the
spirit of meekness. 5And thou shalt go with him at the time of his
going, and be unto him for a scribe, that I may send Oliver
Cowdery whithersoever I will. 6 And thou shalt be ordained under his
hand to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it
shall be given thee by my Spirit: 7 For he shall lay his hands upon
thee, and thou shalt receive the Holy Ghost, and thy time shall be given
to writing, and to learning much. 8 And thou needest not fear, for thy
husband shall support thee from the church: 9 For unto them is his
calling, that all things might be revealed unto them, whatsoever I
will according to their faith."

When Emma and Jo arrived in Kirtland, she was pregnant with twins
Thaddeus and Louisa Smith. The final migration to Fayette a few months
before Kirtland was hard for multiple reasons. First off, from
everything that had happened with Jo, the plates and Book of Mormon, his
trials for disorderly conduct, the foundation of the Mormon Church, the
relationship between Emma and her family was on the rocks. When they
departed for New York, Emma said goodbye to her parents for the final
time. She would never see them again before their deaths. She may have
seen siblings after that time, but there's no historical record of it.
It would be rational to conclude that this goodbye at the beginning of
1831 was her final goodbye to her family and any semblance of her
previous life. Other reasons for what made this move so hard are further
discussed by Avery and Newell on page 35.

"Emma bade farewell to her parents. It was a difficult parting for her.
She loved the peaceful Susquehanna, the lore of Ichabod Swamp, and the
hardwood forests. She had come back nearly two years earlier
anticipating much. The baby who had stirred inside her then lay buried
near the house. Hope for a reconciliation between her father and her
husband had evaporated. Emma would never see Harmony, her mother, or her
father again...

Emma was pregnant again, and ill. Her mother-in-law kept watch over her
and noted that 'Emma's health at this time was quite delicate, yet she
did not favor herself on this account, but whatever her hands found to
do, she did with her might, until she went so far beyond her strength
that she brought upon herself a heavy fit of sickness, which lasted for
weeks. And, although her strength was exhausted, still her spirits were
the same, which, in fact, was always the case with her, even under the
most trying circumstances.'"

If Emma hadn't been the emotional support to Joseph she was, who knows
how far Jo would have gotten in life. During all their trials and
tribulations, this description by her mother-in-law, Lucy Mack Smith,
seems consistent among multiple accounts. She was unflappable, never
made her own inconveniences an object of complaint, and always rendered
help to others, even when it endangered her own health or well-being.

Whatever it was she did at this time, it likely didn't do well for the
twins she was carrying. 2 months after her and Jo's arrival to Ohio, she
had delivered the twins prematurely. Thaddeus and Louisa lived for a
mere hour or two in agony and perished due to malformity. Once again,
the delivery nearly killed Emma. But her physical illness was nothing
compared to her compromised emotional well-being. She'd now given birth
to three children who didn't survive even a single day. For a couple
trying to become parents, this must have been absolutely devastating for
both Emma and Jo.

Jo and Emma had a close personal friend in the Murdock couple. The
Murdocks had just given birth to twins which unfortunately killed their
mother during the delivery process. Twins Joseph and Julia Murdock's
survival depended on a nursing mother. Emma had just lost her own twins
but her body was biologically ready to nurse upon her recovery. 3 weeks
after Thaddeus and Louisa were delivered and passed away, Emma and Jo
took in Joseph and Julia Murdock to be raised as their own children.
This was a great secret in Kirtland. Jo and Emma never planned on
telling Joseph and Julia that they were adopted, instead opting to raise
them truly as their own.

During a bout of the measles when Joseph and Julia were less than a year
old, Joseph was dragged out and tarred and feathered. When the mob
dispersed and Jo returned covered in tar, Emma thought it was blood and
Jo was sure to die. She fainted while the Johnson family dragged Jo into
the house. It should be understood that one of the possible explanations
for this violent mob attack could have been due to Jo fooling around
with Marinda Nancy Johnson, which explains why the mob attempted to
poison and castrate Jo until the doctor in the mob lost his nerve and
didn't perform the mutilation.

For some reason, little Joseph Murdock Smith, 11 months old at the time,
was exposed to the cold winter air. He suffered for another few days as
his symptoms worsened and eventually perished as well. That's three
total births and one adoption in Emma and Joseph's guardianship who died
before maturing. We can't even fathom what this must have done to poor
Emma, especially if we consider that the mobbing and resulting death of
Joseph Murdock were due to Joseph's infidelity with a 16-year-old they
were living with at the time. Emma had some incredible emotional
fortitude to withstand all these severe buffetings resulting from Jo's
own actions.

Fast forward another 2 years and we arrive to Zion's camp. In the
interim period, Emma birthed her first child which didn't die soon after
childbirth, Joseph Smith III. He would eventually go on to lead the
Reorganized church starting in April of 1860, 16 years after Joseph
Smith's death. The actions which led to the formation of Zion's camp
were wildly complex, but suffice it to say, the Mormons had been removed
from Jackson County in Missouri due to far too many issues we can't get
into here. You'll have to go back to episodes 28-33 to get the details.
Essentially, the Mormons threatened the way of life of the Missourians
and the Missourians didn't take kindly to it. The Missourians mobbed the
Mormon's property in Jackson county, burned their printing press, and
violently removed them from the county.

In answer to this violence, Jo organized a Mormon militia of 205 armed
soldiers and 11 women and a few children to help cook and clean during
the journey. They marched the 800 miles from Kirtland to Missouri to
redeem Zion by any means necessary. The whole debacle ended with no real
violence but a couple of armed standoffs. Jo delivered his fishing-river
revelation basically disbanding the militia, paying each soldier \$1.14
for their trouble, and he told them that they'd have to find their own
way back home to Ohio.

However, the rumors and headlines being printed incited much confusion.
The Mormon militia was struck with cholera, eventually resulting in 68
people becoming sick, Joseph included, and 14 people in total dying. The
unsubstantiated rumors filtering their way back to Kirtland during the
march must have caused chaos and discord among the remaining Mormons in
Ohio.

"What little news reached Emma in Kirtland was erroneous and slow
arriving. On July 12 the Chardon Spectator announced that "a body of
well-armed Mormons, lead on by their great prophet, Joe Smith, lately
attempted to cross the river into Jackson county... a battle ensued, in
which, Joe Smith was wounded in the leg, and the Mormons obliged to
retreat;... Joe Smith's limb was amputated, but he died three days after
the operation." Until word filtered back, or Joseph arrived in Kirtland
two weeks later, Emma may have believed him dead." Mormon Enigma p. 52

With little Julia Murdock being 2 years old, and young Joseph III being
just over a year old, a church of hundreds of members, financial affairs
in Kirtland in complete and utter chaos, and Emma with no professional
training to provide for her family should Jo experience an untimely
death, what thoughts must have plagued her mind? Her husband, by whose
side she'd stuck for the past 7 years through so much tribulation, was
dead from his first Mormon military campaign, perished as a result of
religious persecution, how would she go on? Needless to say, the pain
and suffering, physical and emotional, that Jo put Emma through was
something we could never wrap our minds around today. All we can do is
look at the sequence of events and try to sympathize with what it must
have been like to live through them without the historical hindsight we
have today.

Emma was one of the family. We can't forget that she'd forsaken the Hale
family and become a member of the Smith family when she said goodbye to
her past life and joined the Smiths, first in Fayette, then in Ohio.

"After dinner Emma went to a High Council meeting with Joseph. The
matter of business was the trial of a couple charged with whipping their
daughter unreasonably. Lucy Mack Smith began to testify about matters
that Joseph believed had long since been settled in the church, and he
objected to his mother's comments. William Smith rose and charged Joseph
with invalidating her testimony. Joseph told William he was out of order
and asked him to sit her down. Joseph threatened to walk out of the
meeting, but Father Smith intervened and they returned to the issue at
hand. The erring parents were finally reprimanded for raising a daughter
who required the whip at fifteen years.

The Smith family fight did not diminish with the end of the meeting. Two
days later Joseph, William, and Hyrum met at Emma's house to settle
their differences. William said Joseph always tried to carry out his own
plans whether they were right or wrong---a charge Joseph regarded as an
insult. When Hyrum attempted to make peace William rushed outdoors, bent
upon vengeance. The argument upset Emma and the other Smiths two full
months. Though the disagreement had begun over a relatively minor
matter, the fury that sustained it came from a deeper source and would
continue to disrupt the two brothers' relationship.

A week after the argument with William, Joseph came home from Sunday
services and scolded Emma for leaving the meeting before the Sacrament
was passed. His words brought Emma to tears. "She made no reply," his
history stated, "but manifested contrition by weeping." But he
apparently attempted to ease some strain for Emma. On October 17, 1835,
he called his family together, "arranged domestic concerns," and
dismissed his boarders." Mormon Enigma p. 55-6

Everything that happened with the Smiths happened to Emma too. It was
the only family she had. Her only sense of sisterhood came from the
wives of the other Mormon elites and the younger women the Smiths took
into their house for Emma to teach homemaking skills. You may wonder,
why would Emma need help around the house and take in so many young
women? Well, the truth of the matter is that Jo and Emma rarely ever
lived in a home as just their own little nuclear family. The vast
majority of their living conditions usually involved other families in
the same home as them. Whether it was them living with other families
like the Whitneys, Johnsons, the elder Smiths, the Morelys, or Jo and
Emma living in their own home and boarding other Mormon families who
were refugees at various times and didn't have their own roof to live
under. Whatever the case, Jo and Emma rarely had the privacy of their
own home. Emma took these younger women into the Smith home, gave them
room and board, and taught them homemaking skills they would need when
they eventually married and had their own home to make.

Emma was always a giver and lover of nearly everybody with whom she came
into contact. The community reflected her love. The Mormons loved Emma.
She wasn't just the elect lady, she was mother Emma to hundreds, then
thousands of people who needed to see a powerful nuclear family at the
head of their religion to feel secure. When turmoil and so-called
religious persecution gripped the Mormon population, whether in Ohio,
Missouri, New York, or Illinois, Emma and Jo were always the
picture-perfect couple leading by example.

At least that's how it looked to the public. Their marriage was filled
with conflict like any other marriage. Arguably, Jo's conduct brought
about conflict Emma had to suffer through and deal with that most other
marriages are insulated from.

We'll get back to Emma after a quick word from our sponsor this week,
49dollarsites.com:

Last week I gave everybody a call to action, and that was to go to
nakedmormonismpodcast.com and look at the old site that I built 3 and a
half years ago so that you all could have a reference point for what a
professionally built site looks like in comparison. Well everybody, I'm
excited to announce that the new nakedmormonismpodcast.com is up and
running! I've been working with the staff of 49dollarsites.com to get
the site tweaked, adjusted, and built to be exactly what I wanted. Don't
take my word for it, login to the site yourself and you'll see how
user-friendly it is. 49dollarsites.com built the new website,
restructuring the backlog and organizing history vs. interview episodes,
posting up all the pictures taken on the Mormon history tour that you
can download and use for free from a ton of Mormon history sites all
across the country. They built in an amazing balance of pictures and
text that are pleasing to the eye, and most importantly,
49dollarsites.com made it super mobile-friendly. It looks great on a
smartphone or tablet and retains all the functionality of the full
desktop site. They fully search engine optimized the site and retained
the search rankings from the site to make sure it's just as visible in
google searches as the old site.

I've had an amazing experience in working with 49dollarsites.com. The
project manager assigned to the project was extremely attentive, worked
with me through dozens of emails and even a few phone calls to make sure
the site was absolutely EXACTLY what I wanted. Their team was extremely
professional and I can tell you from my own experience that I'll be
using 49dollarsites in the future for any website needs I have. What's
even better, they maintain everything for me. I can forget all the time
wasted on maintenance and security with the old site because they simply
take care of everything.

If you need a website built for any reason, whether you're a small
business owner, and especially if you're a podcaster, I know there are a
few of you listening right now, having 49dollarsites build your website
is something you'll kick yourself for not doing sooner. If you have a
website that you want to look professional so people can take your
business or podcast seriously, 49dollarsites will make it happen.

Don't forget, if you use promo code 'Naked' at checkout, you get a free
upgrade to the pro package and also give a little kickback to this show.
49dollarsites.com is stretching your dollars to give you an awesome pro
site and the regular price, and it helps support this show. You can't
justify waiting around anymore. If you need a website, or your current
website is.... How do you say it.... Blegh? Just do it. Go to
49dollarsites.com and sign up. Don't forget that promo code, 'Naked' at
check out to get all the extra pro features for the regular price. Even
if you don't need a website right now, check out the new and improved
nakedmormonismpodcast.com and you'll see what professional website
builders can accomplish when that time comes that you need a really
awesome website.

Here are just a few of the features of the pro package you'll get if you
sign up now with promo code 'Naked'

-   Responsive web design optimized for mobile 

-   Hosting

-   Daily back-ups 

-   Search Engine Optimized site 

-   Engaging web content

-   Professional copywriting

-   Contact form

-   Stock images 

-   Unlimited updates

-   No start-up costs

-   A seamless process from start to finish

-    A team of experts based in the USA 

-   An expertly-designed long-form single page site

-   SSL certificate PRO

-   Google analytics PRO

-   Photo gallery PRO

-   Slider with up to 3 photos PRO

-   Promotional pop-ups PRO

-   Google Map integration PRO

-   Text animation PRO

From my own personal experience, 49dollarsites.com has helped so much
and it's truly been a pleasure working with their team. I know you'll
have the same experience when you finally decide to pull the trigger and
have the professionals take it from here. Once again, that's
49dollarsites.com, promo code 'Naked' at checkout to get a free upgrade
to the pro package.

With that, let's get back to the show.

Fanny Alger moved into the Smith home, likely in 1834 or 35 to learn
from Emma homemaking skills. Jo took a liking to the young woman,
there's no way Emma couldn't notice this. Jo had a track record by this
point. Rumors of Eliza Winters, one of Emma's friends, a few weeks after
Jo and Emma had eloped, public rumors about the Stowell sisters which Jo
stood on trial for, Jo being dragged out of the Johnson house in Hiram,
Ohio because of funny business with Marinda Nancy Johnson. Wherever Jo
went, rumors of adultery followed. What happened between Jo and Fanny
couldn't have been a mystery, or really even a surprise to Emma.

According to William E. McLellin in an 1872 letter to Emma's eldest son,
Joseph III, he explained what happened in explicit detail, recalling an
1847 conversation he held with Emma:

"\[Emma\] missed Joseph and Fanny Alger. She went to the barn and saw
him and Fanny in the barn together alone. She looked through a crack and
saw the transaction!!! She told me this story too was verily true."
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/plural-wives-overview/fanny-alger/>

Public rumors about the Fanny Alger affair, among other pressures, like
Jo stealing thousands of dollars from the Mormons through the KSS
company, overwhelming debt as a result of the Kirtland Temple
construction and dedication, rumors of Jo's commanding Mormons to
assassinate a wealthy creditor in Kirtland by the name of Grandison
Newell, and countless other reasons Jo had enemies, Kirtland became too
hostile for Emma and Jo to remain. They fled in the middle of the night
in January 1838, headed for Missouri with almost no possessions and the
three-story printing office in flames behind them on the horizon.

Prior to their flight from Kirtland, Emma had taken control of Jo's
terrible financial record. He'd woven such a tangled mess already and
needed some real help. Emma began to become more autonomous and powerful
in organizing church affairs out of sheer necessity.

"People who were convinced that Joseph had intended a swindle at the
outset attacked him verbally and threatened him physically. This
disruption forced Joseph to leave the city frequently. As a consequence,
Emma again took in boarders. Whether they paid in cash or kind, the
results benefited the family. IN Joseph's absence Emma earned their
income and decided how to spend it. She bought, sold, bartered, and
traded. Her letters to Joseph reveal that she wrote as a business
partner, clearly expecting that he would consider what she had to say.
She negotiated with men in solving her financial difficulties, and
though she did not always succeed, she became a person to be dealt with,
not ignored."

While Jo was in hiding, he and Emma shared a brief letter exchange which
seems to exhibit thinly-veiled frustration at his lack of personal
wealth management and his need to leave abruptly without even saying
good bye.

"I cannot tell you my feelings when I found I could not see you before
you left, yet I expect you can realize them, the children feel very
anxious about you because they don't know where you have gone. I have
got all the money that I have had any chance to, and as many goods as I
could... I verily feel that if I had no more confidence in God than some
I could name, I should be in a sad case indeed but I still believe that
if we humble ourselves, and are as faithful as we can be we shall be
delivered from every snare that may be laid for our feet, and our lives
and property will be saved and we redeemed from all unrenderable
encumbrances."

Her next letter exhibits her feelings even more explicitly, written a
mere 8 days later:

"I do not know what to tell you, not having but a few minutes to write,
the situation of your business is such as is very difficult for me to do
anything of any consequence, partnership matters give everybody such an
unaccountable right to every particle of property or money they can lay
their hands on, that there is no prospect of my getting one dollar of
current money or even get the grain you left for our bread, as I sent to
the French place for that wheat and brother Strong says that he shall
let us only have ten bushel, he has sold the hay and keeps the money...
Dr. Cowdery tells me he can't get money to pay the postage of the
office... Brother Parish has been very anxious for some time past to get
the little mare, and I do not know but it would be your will to have him
have her, but I have been so treated that I have come to the
determination not to let any man or woman have anything whatever without
being well assured, that it goes to your own advantage... It is
impossible for me to do anything, as long as ever body has so much
better right to all that is called yours than I have."

This was the Panic of 1837 and the collapse of the KSS company. Capital
had completely evaporated and creditors were waxing urgent on getting
their dues collected. Where was Jo during all of this? In Boston looking
for buried treasure. Hiding out from everybody in Kirtland is a better
explanation, but he'd been approached by his brother who told him about
a guy who knew where some buried treasure could be found in MA, so Jo
took the opportunity to jump right on that bandwagon out of town. On his
return trip, Bloody Brigham Young met Jo a day's ride out of Kirtland
and told him of an assassination plot by the Quorum of Apostles waiting
for him upon his return.

Jo thwarted the attempt by simply having advanced word of it happening,
but Warren Parrish did burst into a meeting at the Kirtland temple with
an entourage of disaffected Mormons, holding the leadership at gunpoint
and claiming the Church was in apostasy. These are the circumstances Jo
was dragging Emma through.

You have to wonder how often she was left at home while letters for Jo
were piling up, people were knocking on the door every few minutes
wanting to have a word with the prophet, 3 kids crying because the scary
men at the door were yelling, all while Jo was in hiding, how often did
she reminisce on her charmed life in Harmony before meeting Joseph Smith
and yearn for a simpler time? To the public she exhibited a stoic first
lady of the highest regard, never voicing her personal wants, never
engaging with the speculative dribble of gossip constantly circulating;
who was she in private? Who was Emma behind closed doors when it was
just her and her children? What were conversations like between her and
the prophet?

Their midnight flight to Missouri resulted in them living with the
Harris family. Not Martin Harris, Jo had sucked that money fountain dry
and he remained in Kirtland part of the Mormon congregation which had
excommunicated Jo. This was the Harris family of George W. and Lucinda
Pendleton Morgan Harris. Joseph's diary recounts the situation as Jo,
Emma, and the Smith children Julia Murdock, Young Joseph III and
Frederick Granger entered Far West, Missouri.

"On the 14th of March \[1838\], as we were about entering Far West, many
of the brethren came out to meet us, who also with open arms welcomed us
to their bosoms. We were immediately received under the hospitable roof
of Brother George W. Harris, who treated us with all possible kindness,
and we refreshed ourselves with much satisfaction, after our long and
tedious journey."
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/plural-wives-overview/lucinda-pendleton-harris/>

Lucinda Pendleton was the widow of the infamous William Morgan who'd
published his expose of Masonry in 1826 and went missing soon afterwards
in the custody of Masons. During the two months Jo and Emma lived with
the Harrises, Jo courted Lucinda and took her to wife. Even in a time of
a dire situation like their lives being threatened, forcing the Smiths
to abruptly flee to Missouri, Jo found time to court a new wife in the
same household as he, Emma, and the kids were living in. The historical
record can't prove whether or not Emma was aware of this relationship.
Biographers claim she was completely oblivious to the majority of Jo's
wives and there's no way to unequivocally prove otherwise. We do know,
however, that she was aware of at least 7 of his more than 33 wives and
tacitly granted her approval of his taking those women. The majority of
those 7 historians know she was aware of were younger women who were
living in the Smith home as she was teaching them homemaking skills.

The year of 1838 in Missouri resulted in the Mormon war. Jo, Sidney
Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and a couple dozen other Mormons ended up in
Liberty or Richmond jail while the Mormon exodus from Missouri to
Quincy, Illinois was being organized by the remaining Quorum of Twelve
who weren't incarcerated. Brigham Young was at the forefront of this
organization effort, elevating his status in the community and garnering
due respect for his tireless efforts in moving thousands of Mormon war
refugees hundreds of miles with minimal casualties.

While Jo was interred in the deplorable conditions of Liberty Jail, Emma
made a number of visits to see her husband. Sometimes with Joseph III,
other times alone. Some times staying a day, other times staying 2 days.
Jo was in Liberty Jail awaiting a jury trial on charges of arson,
robbery, and high treason against the Union for inciting the Mormon war
and aggressively attacking a state militia. Should his conviction go
through, Jo and friends faced the gallows. This ultimatum must have been
a dark cloud over Emma's visits. What do you say to your spouse when
there's nothing you can do to help him and he's facing the death
penalty? Did they talk about the cold weather? Did they talk about how
fast the kids are growing up?

A few letters passed between Jo and Emma during his time in Liberty Jail
are extant today and they reveal a profound heartache of Jo to return to
his family and an overwhelming sense of worry on Emma's part. During one
of these visits, with the gallows awaiting Joseph Smith, Young Joseph
III was brought in and Jo pronounced a blessing on his head that he
would inherit all the keys and blessings bestowed on his father. In
later years, Young Jo didn't remember the details of the blessing, just
that it happened, and it was never recorded, but historians know it
happened from accounts of the other men in the jail when the blessing
occurred.

Eventually it came time for Emma to pick up what little possessions she
could along with the kids and move from Far West to Quincy, Illinois.
She and others took great pains to preserve information for our benefit
today.

"While Joseph was imprisoned, his scribe, James Mulholland, had stayed
in Emma's home and kept Joseph's papers. When the local men became
unruly, Mulholland gave the papers to his sister-in-law, thinking a
woman might escape search. "Immediately on taking possession of the
papers," Ann Scott related, "I made two cotton bags of sufficient size
to contain them ,sewing a band around the top ends of sufficient length
to button around my waist; and I carried those papers on my person in
the day-time, when the mob was round, and slept with them under my
pillow at night... I gave them to sister Emma Smith... on the evening of
her departure for Commerce."...

The Mississippi had frozen over before Emma arrived. Fearful of the thin
ice, she separated the two horses, put Charlie on her wagon and trailed
Jim behind, then walked apart with two-and-a-half-year-old Frederick,
and eight-month-old Alexander in her arms. She had Julia hold tightly to
her skirt on one side, positioned young Joseph on the other, and, with
the heavy bags of Joseph's papers fastened securely to her waist, Emma
walked across the frozen river to safety. Of this trek she later wrote,
'No one but God knows the reflections of my mind and the feelings of my
heart when I left our house and home, and almost all of everything that
we possessed excepting our little children, and took my journey out of
the State of Missouri, leaving \[Joseph\] shut up in that lonesome
prison. But the reflection is more than human nature ought to bear, and
if God does not record our sufferings and avenge our wrongs on them that
are guilty, I shall be sadly mistaken.'" Mormon Enigma p. 79

What an amazing human being. 4 children, a couple of horses and a wagon
with a few small provisions, none of their furniture or creature
comforts, and two heavy bags around her waist of Jo's papers which would
have proved him guilty of treason and fully deserving of the gallows,
thus the close guarding of them, all of that for hundreds of miles in
the dead of winter to get her and her family to safety in Quincy,
Illinois.

Thousands of Mormon refugees pouring into Quincy and the surrounding
areas. Living out of wagons and makeshift shacks haphazardly constructed
from a few felled trees, these people became ravaged by sickness and
malnourishment.

Emma took on the role of medicine woman, administering to the sick and
waiting by their bedside at the cost of her own health and sanity.

Jo and Emma continued to exchange letters while he languished in jail
prior to his escape. He sent an epistle to the church on March 21.
What's particularly remarkable about this epistle is that Jo asked Emma
read it to the congregation. Not Brigham Young who was essentially
second in command in the area. Not Sidney Rigdon who'd been released on
a writ of Habeas Corpus and was acting president of the Church in Jo's
absence... It was Emma who read the epistle to the Saints commanding
them to compiles bills for what they'd lost which Jo would eventually
present to the President of the United States, Martin Van Buren.

Once Jo finally escaped, the situation is absolutely incredible.

"A disheveled traveler leaned against the side rail \[of the ferry\]
with his head turned away. Ragged pants were tucked inside old boots
full of holes. He wore a blue cloak with the collar turned up to hide
his face, and a wide-brimmed black hat drooped down over his unkempt
beard. His skin was pale and his body wasted. Dimick approached the
ferry as the man guardedly raised his head. "My God!" Huntington
exclaimed. "Brother Joseph, is that you?"

Alarmed, joseph hushed Dimick and immediately asked about Emma and the
children. Huntington explained that they were several miles away and
asked if he did not want to find his parents first. Impatient at any
delay, Joseph insisted, "Take me to my family as quick as you can."
Dimick located a second horse and Joseph slouched in the saddle to avoid
detection as they negotiated the back streets of tow. Joseph did not
realize that Mormons could hold their heads up in Quincy.

As they approached the Cleveland house Dimick hung back, suspecting that
a reunion worth observing might be at hand. Emma glanced through the
door at the stranger stopping at the yard and recognized him before he
had time to dismount. She ran through the door and was in Joseph's arms
before he was halfway to the front gate."

After a year-long war and so many trials, 5 months of internment in a
horrible jail with deplorable conditions, Jo suspecting he'd been
poisoned and fed human flesh, Emma moving the family and their few
possessions hundreds of miles through the dead of Midwest winter,
sickness ravaging every camp of Mormons, thousands of people destitute
with nowhere to turn, Emma and Jo were finally reunited. What a reunion
it must have been for Dimick Huntington to watch. Emma and the children
were living with the Clevelands in Quincy and Jo was glad that his
family was cared for by a few trusted Mormon elites.

The Clevelands would eventually have a plot in the city of Nauvoo
adjacent to the Smith homestead before Jo and Emma moved into the Nauvoo
Mansion. Jo would also eventually court Sarah Cleveland to be one of his
wives, the relationship was likely cultivated during this time when Jo
and Emma lived with them.

That was a recurring theme from day one with Jo and Emma. They would
move into a Mormon's home, and it wasn't long before Jo was sleeping
with one of the women there. 1832 with Marinda Nancy Johnson, Fanny
Alger living with the Smiths in 1835-6, Lucinda Pendleton Morgan Harris
in 1838, Sarah Cleveland in 1839-40, and the list continues. All of
these relationships cultivated right under Emma's nose.... She had to
have known.

We can't know what it was like, but if historians are able to pick out
these patterns, how could Jo's own partner not pick them up. Regardless
of the polygamous relationships Jo was cultivating throughout his career
as prophet of the restoration, Emma just kept being the picture-perfect
first lady of Mormonism, home-making, administering to the sick, sewing
clothing, or anything else duties dictated her to fill her time with.

"When the cool fall air killed the mosquitoes, the malaria gradually
decreased and Emma turned her attention to bringing some order to her
house. She took in two young girls, Julia and Savilla Durfee, to work
for her, Julia as seamstress and teacher, Savilla as maid. Emma's
kitchen duties were probably similar to the other women's. They dried
fruits and vegetables and cured meat. They wrapped rock-hard maple sugar
loaves and hung them from rafters in the smokehouses, then hammered off
small pieces as needed. Most of the milk was made into cheese which
drained from cloth bags or perforated buckets hung from tree limbs or
rafters. Kitchen utensils were simple homemade wooden cutting boards,
rolling pins, spoons, and doughboxes. Emma might have beaten eggs with a
whisk made of birch twigs tied together. A wringer and a washboard
always stood nearby. For clothing to be very clean, the white things
were boiled with homemade soap, making washday a daylong affair." ME p.
86

So many things we take for granted today, homemaking was truly a
full-time job. Emma continued to take in the sick and weary, often
giving her own bed to the sick and needy, leaving her and Jo to sleep on
the floor in front of the fireplace. She never ceased singing or humming
while she worked.

William Holmes Walker: "I arrived at his \[Joseph's\] house about nine
o'clock, just as his family was singing, before the accustomed evening
prayer. His wife Emma, leading in the singing. I thought I had never
heard such sweet, heavenly music before." ME p. 89

This book continues to surprise me with how dynamic it makes Jo and
Emma. We find stories like this on page 90:

"One morning as Emma prepared breakfast the family heard a hesitant
knock. Young Joseph answered the door. A black man named Jack stood
waiting to see the Mormon leader. When invited in, he said he preferred
to wait until the meal was over. Jack had lost one arm just below the
elbow when a cannon discharged prematurely during a Fourth of July
celebration. The illness and fever that followed kept the man from
working, and he had used up all his savings. Now he stood before the
Smiths' door and explained that he could not get work because he looked
so shabby. Joseph brought out a handsome buckskin suit that was his
pride and gave it to the black man, who soon found a position on a
steamer. Long before the suit wore out, he pressed payment for it on
Joseph, who refused to accept it. The suit had been a gift."

The giving and humble nature of Joseph and Emma Smith shines through in
a number of pleasant stories like this that humanize Jo and Emma. They
were the power couple the Mormons needed to be the standard bearers of
society. But we can't forget they were human just like you and me. They
had flaws, desires, complex emotions from anger and frustration to love
and tranquility. Jo's habits also can't be ignored here, he was always
on the prowl for women who were susceptible to his status in the
community. His insatiable urge to be with as many women as possible was
constrained by the logistics of public scrutiny, requiring him to invent
novel solutions.

"During the spring Joseph constructed a large room on the back of the
Homestead. A great fireplace in the north end allowed the extension to
be used as a kitchen and the two original rooms became sleeping
quarters. A special retreat lay hidden under the house. Part way down
the steps leading to the cellar, Joseph cut the timbers bearing the
steps, then hinged the stairs so a couple of them could be lifted
forward. This gave entry to a small vaulted room with a dry brick floor
and bricked walls large enough for two people to occupy either sitting
or lying down."

Yes, Jo built a non-consensual immorality room in his house, right under
Emma's nose. Sure it was used when he was hiding from authorities, but
we have to understand the primary purpose for this secret room under the
stairs of the Nauvoo homestead was a damn rape cellar. Just prior to
this being constructed, Emma and Jo took in the Partridge sisters after
the death of Edward Partridge in May 1840. Emma would consent to Jo
taking the Partridge sisters to wife while they lived in the Smith home.
She knew Jo was sleeping with them, and he was probably using this
little secret room to consummate the polygamous marriages while Emma and
kids were on the other side of the secret entrance.

Any discussion of Emma often devolves into what her views on polygamy
were. Was she okay with it? How many wives did she know about? Was she
bitterly opposed but stuck in her marriage with the prophet and couldn't
control her husbands urges? As we'll see in coming episodes discussing
the Relief society, of which Emma was unanimously elected president,
polygamy was constantly a rumor factory that Emma had to deal with.
Rumors of adultery eventually led to the dissolution of the Relief
Society and the assassination of the prophet. All of this happened with
Emma in full view of what was happening, even if Jo was able to conceal
the majority of his marriages from Emma.

Often absent from conversations about Emma and Mormon polygamy is the
possibility that she may have been willing and consenting to some
extent, but Jo just took it and ran with it. That's a controversial
stance, but maybe Emma and Jo were just free-love people and Mormonism
was a bit closer to the free-love society as many anti-Mormons painted
it in the day. On the surface, Mormonism was a unique restorationist
Protestant Christian cult, behind closed doors, who knows what real
Mormonism was like? Maybe Emma and Jo together enjoyed the company of
other couples after the candles went out from time to time. Maybe Emma
gave Jo a hall-pass at some point and he went on to abuse the privilege
to the point that everything got out of everybody's control, even his
own.

I'll be the first to admit that claiming Mormonism was a sex-cult among
other things runs counter to the majority of the evidence available to
historians, counter to the Victorian culture's view on sexuality and
reproduction, and definitely runs counter to how Mormonism and Mormon
history are largely interpreted today, but we're basing our perception
on limited data. This line of conjecture is based on my own conclusions
that Joseph and Emma Smith were anything but conventional. I think they
were progressive in many ways and I don't think they held to the
standards of sexuality that 19^th^-century American society dictated,
which ruffled a lot of feathers.

Emma's involvement and consent to polygamy isn't binary. She didn't
either completely approve or completely disapprove of it. I think she
consented to some of Jo's marriages and Jo took it a thousand steps too
far. I think they were both caught up in the drama and controversy that
polygamy and rumors of adultery stirred. Emma finding love letters from
Eliza R. Snow, her own secretary in the Relief Society, on Jo's person
and her possibly pushing Eliza down the stairs causing her to miscarry
her only pregnancy didn't happen in a vacuum. I think she knew full well
that Eliza and Jo were in love and at some point, early in their
relationship, she may not have had a problem with it as she was very
close friends with Eliza Snow. But, to see your primary partner growing
closer to another person in a poly relationship can cause a lot of
jealousy and is one of the main breakers in poly relationships.

Whatever we think was going on behind closed doors in Nauvoo, we can
never actually know. The sparse record of polygamy and open
relationships in Mormonism is based solely on the scant bits of evidence
historians can collect about it. Whether Emma consented to many of Jo's
poly relationships or whether she herself had multiple partners, it's
impossible to know and it's even harder to bend the available evidence
to fit such a narrative. I recognize that. This is merely speculation
for the purpose of adding some depth to the historical character of Emma
Smith and possibly approaching the subject with some nuance.

Whatever history truly held, we can never know for sure. We also
shouldn't reduce Emma to the blushing bride mafia wife as is so often
the case when she enters the sphere of historical discourse. These
one-dimensional portraits painted of the historical Emma provide a lot
of insight, but she's so often reduced to a few platitudes of her
character without much nuance to add personality to who the human being,
Emma Hale Smith Bidamon, really was. And for what it's worth, we've
spent a fair amount of time in our examination of Emma today, talking
about Joseph's polygamy. She's so often inextricably tied her husband's
sexuality which isn't fair. We've tumbled into the same pitfall today.
Let's continue to add depth to Emma moving forward as the church body
she was responsible for, the Relief Society, continues to develop and
grow. Emma was amazing. I'll leave you with a few more snapshots into
her personality to close us out for today.

"During these months Emma faced the challenges of domestic life. Her
growing children sometimes displayed a streak of independence, a
rightful inheritance in that family. Once Julia watched one of Sidney
Rigdon's small daughters get what she wanted by banging her head on the
floor and kicking the furniture. Julia decided to try the same approach.
"Don't you go Lacy Rigdon on me," Emma scolded, and picked her child up
from the floor." ME p. 90

"After \[John C. Bennett\] had found another place to live, he still
took many of his meals at Emma's house. Young Joseph recalled that his
mother would set a loaf of her bread in front of the fire until the end
was toasted brown, then cut off a thin slice and replace the loaf. Thus
she prepared Bennett's supper of toasted bread and milk, "Just as he
liked it." ME p. 92

"Emma and the wives of "other distinguished officers \[often\]
accompanied their companions on parade." One woman later wrote of Emma's
fondness for horses and said she "could manage them well in riding or
driving. Many can recall seeing her mounted on horseback beside her
husband in military parade and a grander couple could nowhere be found.
She always dressed becomingly, and a riding costume showed off her
shapely figure to the best advantage." ME p. 93

And one final quote of a description left behind by Emmeline B. Wells
that I think offers a wonderful picture of the Elect Lady of Mormonism.

"Sister Emma was benevolent and hospitable; she drew around her a large
circle of friends, who were like good comrades. She was motherly in her
nature to young people, always had a houseful to entertain or be
entertained. She was very high-spirited and the brethren and sisters
paid her great respect. Emma was a great solace to her husband in all
his persecutions and the severe ordeals through which he passed; she was
always ready to encourage and comfort him, devoted to his interests, and
was constantly by him whenever it was possible. She was a queen in her
home, so to speak, and beloved by the people, who were many of them
indebted to her for favors and kindnesses." ME p. 118

God Awful Movies

Patreon: Nathan, Jake, and Paul

NaMo Home Evening with Phil Ferguson about \$32 billion dollar Mormon
Leak
