---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 96 - Jane Doe, Joseph L. Bishop, LDS Inc.
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-96-jane-doe-joseph-l-bishop-lds-inc/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-96-jane-doe-joseph-l-bishop-lds-inc
category: History
date: 2018-03-27 01:00:54 PDT
---

Ep 96 – Jane Doe, Joseph L. Bishop, LDS Inc.

On this episode, we dive into the recent leak from Mormon Leaks of Jane
Doe interviewing Joseph L. Bishop wherein she accuses him of sexually
assaulting her. There’s a lot to parse out with this story as it broke
at a crucial time ramping up to the Protect LDS Children March happening
at the end of this month.

Links:

PROTECT LDS CHILDREN MARCH THIS FRIDAY  
<http://protectldschildren.org/>

Joseph L. Bishop Jane Doe Audio Recording Leak  
<https://mormonleaks.io/wiki/index.php?title=File:2017-Joseph_L_Bishop-Audio.mp3>

Joseph L. Bishop Jane Doe Audio Transcript  
<https://mormonleaks.io/wiki/documents/f/fd/2017-Joseph_L_Bishop-Transcript.pdf>

Joseph L. Bishop Timeline  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Bishop>

Official Church Statement of Jane Doe’s Sex Abuse Allegations  
<https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/article/statement-former-mission-president-alleged-abuse-joseph-l-bishop-march-2018>

Deseret News ‘Woman Levels Accusations Against Former MTC President’  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013479/woman-levels-accusations-against-former-mtc-president.html>

Deseret News 2010 Police Report article  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013586/police-report-sheds-more-light-on-accusations-against-former-mtc-president.html>

Utah Statue of Limitations  
<https://le.utah.gov/xcode/Title76/Chapter1/C76-1-P3_1800010118000101.pdf>

HB 330 Utah Dual Party Consent Bill  
<https://le.utah.gov/~2018/bills/static/HB0330.html>

KUTV Objections to HB 330  
<http://kutv.com/news/local/lds-church-supporters-and-other-object-bill-for-secret-recording-ban>

SL Tribune Two Alleged Victims of Joseph L. Bishop  
<https://www.sltrib.com/news/2018/03/23/mormon-leaders-knew-of-two-alleged-victims-of-former-missionary-training-center-president-in-2010/>

MTC ‘Rape Room’ Confirmation  
<http://kutv.com/news/local/former-employee-confirms-odd-mtc-room-with-bed-and-tv>

Deseret News Second Abuse Victim 2010 Allegations  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013796/lds-church-says-a-second-missionary-made-sexual-abuse-allegation-against-former-mtc-president.html>

Jane Doe March 24, 2018 Mormon Leaks Statement  
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2018/03/24/statement-on-behalf-of-victim-in-joseph-l-bishop-audio/>

Elder Robert E. Wells Bishop Book Endorsement  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xrMXSDSZVyE>

Katie L. Feminist Mormon Housewives Response to LDS Statement  
<http://www.feministmormonhousewives.org/2018/03/a-response-to-the-lds-newsrooms-statement-on-sexual-abuse-in-the-mtc/>

FmHLisa Feminist Mormon Housewives Response to Victim Blaming  
<http://www.feministmormonhousewives.org/2018/03/lds-newsroom-mormonleaks-blaming-the-victim-vs-listening-to-victims/>

Updated Bishop’s Interview Policy  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013999/lds-first-presidency-letter-directs-leaders-to-review-teach-policies-on-preventing-responding-to-sex-abuse.html>

Steven Hassan’s BITE Model of Cult Indoctrination  
<http://old.freedomofmind.com/Info/BITE/bitemodel.php>

Richard G. Scott 1992 General Conference Victim Blaming  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mXR4XiA5eoc>

Andrew Torrez Opening Arguments Podcast  
<https://openargs.com/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

For this episode I’d initially hoped to get Ryan and Ethan of
MormonLeaks to talk about the story, but once I started digging into
everything I realized that the subject was simply too large for 3 people
to get through. We’ll get them on in the near future once the story has
developed a bit more. It’s been tough deciding how to cover this topic.
Would it be better to split it up over a multi-part series or just have
one motherlode episode for people to listen to at their leisure? Well,
I’ve opted for the latter. This episode is massive and there’s a ton
of information to get through, but it seems important enough to have all
in one place, and with the Protect LDS Children march coming a few days
after it airs, the timing couldn’t be better. You may have to get
through it in a couple sittings, but I hope you’ll consume it prior to
the march this upcoming Friday. I know this podcast is usually timeless
just reporting on Mormon history, but sometimes you have to zoom in to
modern subjects and headlines when it’s this important, even if it does
date the backlog to a certain extent.

For today, we’re going to walk through everything we know about the Jane
Doe and Joseph Bishop story at the time this airs. The story is
constantly developing and it’ll be interesting to see what happens in
the coming weeks. The dust has yet to settle, but we’re going to see
what sense we can make of the story as it stands right now.

Before we broach the subject, it’s necessary to set the stage to have a
healthy conversation about this subject.

Everything in this episode falls under an umbrella ‘allegedly’. The most
important takeaway from the leak we’ll be discussing is that there is an
active investigation going on into the contents of the leak, and until a
ruling or settlement is reached, these are all allegations. Legal cases
are built upon allegations because allegations become witness
testimonies and affidavits which are weighted in a court of law
accordingly.

These allegations are damning to the involved entities and we’ll get
into those details momentarily. But, the subject here is sexual assault,
one of the hardest accusations to prove in a court of law as it usually
devolves to he-said she-said argument. Personally, I like to air on the
side of caution. If a person claims they were sexually assaulted, it
seems better to play it safe and take their claim as factually as
possible. That’s not to say that false accusations don’t happen from
time to time, but sexual assault is a fragile topic and should be
treated with all due respect. The fact of the matter is, sexual assault
ruins lives and it almost always goes completely unprosecuted for lack
of credible allegations or evidence. We have a fundamental problem with
reconciling the problems surrounding sex abuse, and there is no simple
answer to fixing this problem. However, talking about this openly
hopefully moves us closer to solutions by some extremely miniscule
amount, and with that extremely miniscule amount quantified over enough
time with enough of these conversations, hopefully some solutions are
closer ahead than we realize.

This episode touches on some painful subjects and I’m going to use the
necessary words unapologetically to deal with the present issues. If
sexual assault and rape are something which trigger you, maybe skip this
episode, but I hope you’ll stick with us as this is an extremely
important story to have on the record.

Now for how we’ll structure this, we’ll start out with what we know of
the involved individuals from all of the publicly available information.
Then we’ll do a play by play commentary on the leaked recording. The
recording is 2:44:00, and it’s chalked full of information that many
media outlets have yet to pick up on. We’ll discuss it in detail and
I’ll play some clips with the consent of the Mormon Leaks team.
Hopefully, by the end of this episode we’ll have a one-stop resource to
get the story from top to bottom in context. It’s my hope that after
this we’ll all have enough knowledge to communicate this story
effectively with someone completely unfamiliar with the story weeks,
months, or even years in the future.

Final preface, there are a number of conflicting interests to take into
account with this story and everybody has their opinion clouded by
emotions, yours truly included. I’m no authority on this issue, this is
just how the story seems to make sense in chronological format. There’s
no way to make everybody happy or to not make some people mad with this
story, please bear with me.

Here we go…

We’ll be focusing on three main characters today, Joseph L. Bishop, Jane
Doe, and a woman we’ll know as ‘bleep’. Peppered in at various times are
a few secondary characters, Elder Robert E. Wells and Elder Carlos E.
Asay both of the Quorum of the Seventy the middle-management of the
Church.

Joseph Bishop was born in August 1932 in Delta, Utah where he grew up
and attended local public schooling. Bishop married Carol Callister in
1956 and they had five sons. In 1958, Bishop earned his Ph.D. in
University Administration. He’s led a fulfilling life in academia,
serving as chairman to Imperial Valley College, President of the
Haitian-American Institute, Dean at Mt. San Jacinto College, Vice
President of Prairie State College, and he finally became president of
Weber State College in 1972.

As Joseph Bishop was advancing through his young professional career,
Jane Doe was born in 1962. As she’s remained anonymous throughout the
development of the story, the only thing more of her personal history
the public knows is that she grew up in a household with a sexually
abusive stepfather. This detail is extremely relevant moving forward.

Bishop was called to be Mission President of the Argentina Buenos Aires
North mission in 1979. He served in this office until 1982. According to
the leaked audio, Bishop wasn’t happy in his position as Mission
President in Argentina, we’ll discuss possible reasons why when we
discuss the audio. According to Bishop, President Spencer W. Kimball
visited the Argentina mission while he was president and Bishop broke
down into tears and requested a move. One week later he received a call
from President Kimball asking how he was doing and letting him know that
Bishop was on his mind. One week later, Bishop was transferred stateside
and put in as President of the Provo MTC in 1982. He served in this
capacity until 1986. Bishop authored and published his book “The Making
of a Missionary” in 1982 as he entered the office of President of the
Provo MTC. I couldn’t find it in any of the reports but from the audio
it also sounds as if Bishop served in some Church capacity in Florida
where he may have allegedly committed some form of sexual assault.

Jane Doe seems to have entered the Provo MTC in 1984 when Bishop was 52
years old and she was 21. The alleged rape attempt occurred during this
time. We’ll discuss this in detail when we go through the recording, but
according to Jane Doe, Bishop took her to a basement room of the MTC,
ripped her blouse, exposing her breasts, pulled down her skirt and
attempted to penetrate her, but was unsuccessful to maintain an erection
and therefore allegedly committed a sexual assault without achieving
penetration.

According to Jane in the audio, she was completely devastated and ended
up leaving her mission early, partly as a result of the assault. This
alleged assault coincided with a new education program the MTC trialed,
which Bishop and his wife were put in charge of. The details of this
program are unclear from the recording but after a short trial period it
was abandoned. Something about the program involved Bishop working with
sister missionaries who’d come from troubled homes.

Here ‘bleep’ enters our timeline. ‘Bleep’ was a sister missionary with
whom Jane Doe was well-acquainted. Something occurred causing ‘bleep’ to
attempt suicide while at the MTC. According to the recording, she
attempted to jump from a second-story window of the MTC head first.
Bishop was able to talk her down from the ledge and she was put under
close supervision. According to the audio, Bishop and his wife took
‘bleep’ into their home to care for her.

In response to the troubled young adults coming through the MTC, Bishop
petitioned his friend, Elder Carlos E. Asay of the Seventy to get
funding to hire professional counselors. Prior to ‘bleep’s’ suicide
attempt, Asay told Bishop that Apostle Boyd K. Packer had told the
Seventies to encourage people to not seek psychological or counselling
help, and instead go to their bishops for any problems they may be
struggling with. Asay had denied Bishop’s request for funds for a
counselor based on Packer’s advice, but when ‘bleep’ attempted suicide,
Joseph Bishop told Asay that the responsibility would fall to Asay if
anyone committed suicide in the MTC, and funding was apparently granted
and counselors were brought in, likely employed by the Church.

According to the leaked audio, while ‘bleep’ was under the supervision
of Bishop and his wife living in their home, that’s when Bishop
allegedly molested her. The details of this molestation are from Bishop
himself where he claimed to have given her a back rub but stopped before
things got too far. As ‘bleep’ has yet to come forward to confirm, deny,
or further enlighten the public on these allegations, all we can do is
take Bishop’s at his word that sexual impropriety with ‘bleep’ stopped
at a back rub.

After Jane Doe left her mission, she accused Bishop in 1984 of sexual
assault which apparently resulted in no action. She made a follow up
accusation in 1986 or ’87 and Elder Carlos Asay was sent to her home to
interview her concerning the accusations. According to Eric Hawkins,
current LDS spokesman, from the March 20, 2018 article “the Church can
find no record of a meeting between the woman and Elder Asay.”  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013479/woman-levels-accusations-against-former-mtc-president.html>

According to Bishop in the recording, he was completely unaware of these
accusations and the subsequent meeting between Jane Doe and Elder Asay.
Nothing ever came of this second accusation and the meeting. Jane claims
to have never heard back from Elder Asay or the Church concerning the
accusations. She made subsequent attempts to contact the Church
regarding the accusations and apparently nothing ever came of it.

Presumably, sometime after this meeting between Jane Doe and Elder Asay,
Jane married her current ex-husband and had an unknown number of
children with him. According to Jane in the audio, this husband
emotionally abused her and allegedly had affairs with 14 other women
while they were married. She claims he changed the number to 4 after
their divorce, which eventually evolved to be mere sexual improprieties
with the 4 women instead of full intercourse. Jane claims her husband
was never disciplined by the Church for adultery. She attributes this
marriage, the previous attempted rape by Bishop, and her sexually
abusive stepfather to have engendered a personal loathing for men.
Understandable emotions for a woman who’s allegedly been through this
much abuse. We’ll get into the details when we go through the audio. In
no way should her views on Priesthood holders or men in leadership
positions within the Church taint her accusations. Her opinions of men
are based on her many previous interactions and are 100% justified and
reasonable. This simple fact should never be used to attack or diminish
her allegations, but unfortunately, the simple fact that it was said in
the audio will cause some to latch on to what she said and dismiss her
entire experience and the accompanying allegations because of it.

For unknown reasons, the documentable accusations seem to have gone cold
until 2010 when Jane claimed she desired closure with the man who’d
allegedly assaulted her. Jane raised accusations of sexual assault again
and also threatened to kill Joseph Bishop. Because of the death threat,
the police were summoned to her home where they interviewed her and
generated a police report. According to Jane in the recording, she had
contacted the church multiple times over the years to learn the
whereabouts of the investigation into Bishop. She wanted to know if he’d
denied it, if he’d been disciplined, etc., the Church told her she was
not entitled to that information and they were unwilling to help her.
Sometime during these 2010 accusations and the following death threat,
Bishop claims he confessed his sexual indiscretions to a member of the
Quorum of the Seventy by the name of Robert E. Wells.

At that point, Wells told Bishop he was being considered for a position
as a member of the Quorum of the Seventy. Wells told Bishop that he was
removed from the list of contenders, and Bishop claims he knows why,
we’re left to surmise that it was due to his confessions to Robert
Wells that his named was removed from the list of contenders.

Also in 2010, ‘bleep’ apparently came forward independently with
accusations that Bishop had assaulted her in the MTC around the same
time he allegedly assaulted Jane Doe. From a March 23, 2018 Deseret News
article by Tad Walch who’s been covering this story since it broke:

“The church statement said, "We are aware of one other woman (who is
referenced in the December recording) who informed her local
ecclesiastical leaders that she was sexually abused by Joseph Bishop
while he served as president of the Missionary Training Center.

"When she reported the alleged abuse to her local church leaders in
2010, they provided emotional support as well as professional counseling
services. Mr. Bishop’s local ecclesiastical leaders were contacted and
they confronted him with her claims, which he denied, and local leaders
did not feel they could pursue church discipline for Mr. Bishop."

The release said church leaders share "anger and distress church members
and others feel to learn of incidents where those entrusted with sacred
responsibilities violate God’s commandments and harm others."

It called such behavior repulsive and sinful.

"The church is looking into all aspects of the assertions on the
recording of Joseph Bishop. This includes the work of outside legal
counsel, who are interviewing priesthood leaders, family members, law
enforcement officials and others with knowledge of these incidents."  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013796/lds-church-says-a-second-missionary-made-sexual-abuse-allegation-against-former-mtc-president.html>

This release alone documents a fatal flaw in the way the Church handles
these issues. According to this press release from the church-owned
Deseret News, ‘Bleep’ accused Bishop in 2010, the same year as Jane Doe
reiterated her accusations and threatened to kill Bishop. When the
matter came to the Church’s attention, ‘bleep’ was turned over to her
local bishop or stake president who provided her with counselling and
emotional support, but it seems Bishop was never called to a
disciplinary council for these sexual assault allegations. He was also
never turned over to local secular authorities on the charges.

While this self-policing by the Church can be understandably infuriating
for many of us, we’ll draw conclusions after we have more information.

The 2010 accusations leveled by Jane Doe and the subsequent death threat
were turned over to the deputy Utah County attorney, David Sturgill, who
said this of his investigation:

“I have no reason to doubt the victim’s disclosure, and would have
likely prosecuted Mr. Bishop but for the expiration of the statute of
limitations” The Deseret News article concludes with the following: “The
statute of limitations for rape expires after four years.”  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900013479/woman-levels-accusations-against-former-mtc-president.html>

It’s unclear whether this assertion was based on old precedent, whether
it was a misunderstanding by Tad Walch, or if it was deliberate
obfuscation. Regardless, the assertion published by the Deseret News is
blatantly wrong. The current Utah Code concerning statute of limitations
states the following in Sec 76-1-301 subtitled “Offenses for which
prosecution may be commenced at any time”

(2)(a)capital felony;  
(b)aggravated murder;  
(c)murder;  
(h)rape;  
(i)rape of a child;  
(j)object rape;  
etc.

It’s unclear what precedent the deputy Utah County attorney was using to
claim Jane Doe’s statute of limitations had run out. It may have been
due to the detail in Jane Doe’s recording that Bishop merely assaulted
her but didn’t achieve penetration which therefore doesn’t qualify as
rape. From the press releases and the redacted police report it’s
unclear how the assertion was justified.

The 2010 accusations by Jane Doe and ‘bleep’ and the following police
investigation into the death threat never went anywhere after 2010.
According to the interview audio, Bishop was never made aware of Jane
Doe threatening his life.

Fast forward to 2012, no follow up accusation seems to have arisen in
the interim 2 years between 2010-2012. Bishop published his book, Peace
be Unto Thy Soul. On the back of the book you find this endorsement
which was reported in one of the YouTube videos produced by Thinker of
Thoughts:

“Adversity is a common theme in mortality and can come to us at ay time.
That fact alone makes the topic of this book so universal that it
warrants being in every Church member’s home. The author beautifully
combines spiritual comfort with practical wisdom—resulting in a mature,
sweet, and uplifting force that moves you through remorse and suffering
and into spiritual well-being. I found it profoundly spiritual because
Dr. Bishop continually brings forth eternal truths pleasing to the soul.
It is not only a good read but is also a good, standard go-to reference
for any trying occasion.”

This endorsement was given by Robert E. Wells. If we’re to believe the
tape, Robert E. Wells and Joseph Bishop have been good friends for more
than 40 years. This is the same Robert Wells that Bishop allegedly
confessed his problems with what he calls ‘sex addiction’ to in 2010
when Jane Doe and ‘bleep’ leveled their accusations.

Joseph Bishop went on to publish 30 Ways to Love Your Mission in 2014.
The book synopsis from goodreads.com is as follows:

“To be a great missionary requires preparation, and with so much to
learn, it can be overwhelming — that is, until now\! 30 Ways to Love
Your Mission is your handy guidebook of field-tested methods for
navigating the path of missionary life. These pages are filled with
simple suggestions, true stories, and inspiring scriptural references
divided into three main topics:  
  
Track positives, ignore negatives  
Improve your work  
Receive inspiration and revelation  
  
Your confidence will increase as you discover tips for getting along
with companions, maintaining a positive attitude, dealing with
discouragement, and so much more\! For anyone who has ever asked the
question, “How can I be an awesome missionary?” this indispensable book
has the answer.”

Given the recent revelations and allegations surrounding Bishop, this
description seems to take on a haunting secondary meaning.

In 2016, Jane Doe brought the accusations forward again which didn’t end
up going anywhere. It’s important to chronicle each and every one of
these accusations we have evidence of. However, it can be a bit
confusing as some of the media reports seem to contradict each other or
are missing details. From what I can gather, Jane accused Joseph Bishop
of sexual assault in 1984, 1986 or ’87, 2010, 2016, and possibly a few
times in between all of those. Each time these accusations were handled
by the Church or directly dealt with by Wells or Asay, members of the
Quorum of the Seventy, the middle management of the Church. From what
I’ve gathered, police were only involved in the 2010 instance, but
that was only due to Jane Doe making death threats against Bishop. Jane
attempted to go the proper channels multiple times and was unable to
reconcile or reach a settlement with her alleged abuser.

In December of 2017, Jane hired an attorney who made the Church aware
that they were pursuing the sexual assault allegations against Bishop.
From the audio recording, it seems as if Bishop was unaware of this
fact. December 2, 2017, Jane Doe posed as a reporter and interviewed
Joseph Bishop for 2:44. We’ll go through the audio momentarily but first
let’s discuss how this became a public story and put it into context as
best we can.

Jane Doe’s lawyer sent the recording to the Church headquarters in SLC
in January 2018 after the recording was made and they claimed they would
handle the matter and open up an investigation into Joseph Bishop.
According to the Church’s official statement:

“The matter resurfaced in 2016 when the same individual contacted a
stake president in Pueblo, Colorado, and then again a few weeks ago in
January 2018, when the Church was contacted by a lawyer representing
her. He provided a copy of a recording that she had made of a
conversation between her and 85-year-old Joseph Bishop in December 2017.
Since that time, the Church has engaged in an investigation of this
individual’s allegations. In the course of that investigation, both she
and Mr. Bishop have been interviewed by outside legal counsel. Not
surprisingly, the stories, timelines and recollections of those involved
are dramatically different. This woman reaffirmed her allegations, and
Mr. Bishop has again denied them. We have no record of an interview
between Elder Carlos E. Asay (1926-1999) and this individual.”

According to its own statement, the Church had the recording and
transcript in early January 2018.

Put a pin in the Church having the leaked audio for a minute. We’ll pick
up there momentarily. In October of 2017, former LDS Bishop, Sam Young,
created a petition called Protect LDS Children. This campaign seeks to
end one-on-one closed-door interviews between bishops and members,
especially when they include sexual questioning. One way Mormons have
been combatting sexually explicit bishop’s interviews is by creating
audio recordings of these interactions. The reasons and needs for
recording these interviews to legally protect members and bishops alike
are too numerous to discuss in this forum.

Mormons recording their bishop’s interviews without the Bishop’s consent
is legal in Utah as a single party consent state. One ancillary effect
of these bishop’s interviews which can’t be ignored is how it normalizes
a child or young adult to being questioned about sexual matters by a
trusted member of the community. Bishops aren’t trained counselors, yet
the system as it currently stands requires them to ask children and
young adults at regular interviews if they are ‘keeping the law of
chastity’. If the answer isn’t ‘yes’ then further questioning often
follows and those questions can be particularly invasive, asking the
interviewee to detail their masturbation habits, how often they are in
an intimate setting with another person and exactly what that intimacy
entails. A degree of punishment usually follows depending on how
egregious the sin is deemed to be. Masturbation once in a while can be
punished by not allowing the offender to take sacrament for a few weeks,
whereas anything beyond that including making out, petting, necking,
nakedness, fondling, and everything involved in intimacy can merit a
much harsher punishment of disfellowship or excommunication or being
barred from going on a mission. The social stigma and public shame
attached to sexual desires is exerted through these bishop’s interviews
isn’t easy to put into words.

In the midst of these bishop’s interviews being recorded, some of which
were posted online, and the Church having the Jane Doe audio in their
possession, we arrive at February 6, 2018. Utah news outlets exploded
with articles, comments, and opinion pieces with a new bill proposed by
the Salt Lake Chamber known as HB 330. The bill proposed by
Representative V. Lowry Snow and Senator Todd Weiler would make Utah a
dual-party consent state. As it stands, Utah is one of 38 states which
are single party consent states when it comes to audio and video
recording. Any person can record any conversation they have with another
person without getting consent from the other party in these states.

From the Deseret News on February 6, 2018:

“A state legislator introduced a bill Tuesday that would undo a
longstanding Utah law allowing a person to record a personal
conversation or telephone call without telling the other party.

Rep. Lowry Snow's
proposal, [HB330](https://le.utah.gov/~2018/bills/static/HB0330.html),
would make it a crime to record a conversation with someone without
their consent.

The Santa Clara Republican said the Salt Lake Chamber contacted him
about running the bill before the legislative session as a way to
protect proprietary business interests.

Snow said he also received a call from The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints with interest in the bill and a possible desire to
support it. The church issued a statement Tuesday backing the measure.

"Church representatives have spoken with legislators to express support
for (HB330), which is intended to protect the confidentiality of
sensitive private conversations, including those between ecclesiastical
leaders and their members," according to LDS Church spokesman Eric
Hawkins.”  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/900009626/bill-would-require-consent-to-record-a-conversation-in-utah.html>

Two days later, due to the extreme backlash from Utah, national media,
and online groups, the bill was retracted. The Salt Lake Tribune
reported the reasoning behind the retraction on February 8, 2018:

“Lane Beattie, the outgoing president and CEO of the Salt Lake Chamber,
said he was talking with Snow about how and whether to press forward
with the bill this session.

“There were a lot of questions that came up that justifiably slowed the
bill down,” Beattie said. “We’re very sensitive about” the public
opinion.

Beattie said one possibility is drastically narrowing the bill, keeping
Utah a one-party recording consent state and adding exemptions or
scenarios into the existing law when people would need permission to
record…

“We’re going to go back to the drawing board,” he said, adding that he
recognized the 45-day session was nearly halfway through and he’d avoid
a late push to pass a bill that appeared to “short-circuit public
input.””  
<https://www.sltrib.com/news/2018/02/06/mormon-church-interested-in-bill-that-could-prevent-recording-bishop-interviews/>

Now, maybe the timing of HB 330 is mere coincidence given everything
we’ve discussed so far. It doesn’t seem reasonable to come to that
conclusion, but it could all be coincidence. However, if it isn’t simply
coincidence and this HB was proposed to make recordings like the one
Jane Doe created in her interview with Joseph Bishop illegal, this
possibly represents an example of the Church interfering in Utah
politics at some level.

At some unknown time from January 2018 to mid-March 2018, an unknown
source produced a copy of Jane Doe’s audio recording to Mormon Leaks, an
independent watchdog organization promoting transparency from the
Church. It’s worth noting, this audio was not given to Mormon Leaks by
Jane Doe. The only people with access to the audio were Jane Doe, some
of her closest loved ones, her attorney, and the Church. It logically
follows that this audio was either leaked by Jane Doe’s lawyer without
her consent in order to put public pressure on the Church, which would
be extremely unethical and likely result in disbarment; or, one of Jane
Does friends sent it to Mormon Leaks. However, a third possibility
exists, somebody high up in the Church with access to this extremely
confidential audio could have decided for whatever reason to leak the
audio. There’s no way for us to tell what crack leaked the audio. If it
came from within the Church, I’m sure they’re investigating the people
with access to the audio.

Finally we arrive to March 19, 2018, Mormon Leaks published the audio
with a public statement attached:

“In 2017 Joseph L. Bishop, former President of the Missionary Training
Center (MTC) in Provo, Utah, met with a woman who claims he attempted to
rape her while she was a missionary in the MTC in 1984.

The meeting was recorded and the audio begins with the accuser
interviewing Mr. Bishop for what he thinks is an interview about leaders
in the church. At \[40:30\] the accuser transitions the conversation to
her discussing what she claims he did to her in the MTC.

A long conversation ensues in which the accuser not only discusses what
she claims happened to her, but also prods Mr. Bishop into discussing
his interactions with other women.

While Mr. Bishop never affirmatively acknowledges any specific actions,
he admits that he has molested at least one woman and has been
inappropriate with many other women. At one point he claims if the full
extent of his sins were to be revealed he would be excommunicated and
the Mormon Church would be embarrassed.

This audio serves to demonstrate the abuse that can potentially take
place between Mormon leaders and those under their ecclesiastical
charge.”

The audio instantly went viral in multiple online communities before
national media picked it up. Tad Walch wrote the Deseret News article
published the following day titled “Woman levels accusations against
former MTC president”

MormonNewsroom, the Church’s public outlet published a statement the
same day, which is quoted extensively by Tad Walch in the Deseret News
article. A few relevant extracts from the Church’s press release:

“These allegations are very serious and deeply disturbing. If the
allegations of sexual assault are true, it would be a tragic betrayal of
our standards and would result in action by the Church to formally
discipline any member who was guilty of such behavior, especially
someone in a position of trust.

This matter was brought to the attention of the Church in 2010, when
this former Church member, who served briefly as a missionary in 1984,
told leaders of the Pleasant Grove Utah West Stake that she had been
sexually assaulted by the president of the Provo Missionary Training
Center, Joseph Bishop, 25 years earlier. They listened carefully to the
claims being made and then this was immediately reported to the Pleasant
Grove Police Department, and the police interviewed her at that time.
The Church does not know what she said in that interview, but the Church
received no further communication from the police concerning the
matter.”

<https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/article/statement-former-mission-president-alleged-abuse-joseph-l-bishop-march-2018>

It was a mere few hours after the story went public that Deseret Book
and Seagull Book, both Church publication outlets, pulled Bishop’s books
from their online bookshelves. His author pages have been taken down
from both sites and the public outcry in Amazon reviews of his books
have taken the ratings from largely positive to barely one star. It’s
reasonable to assume that the people reviewing wish they could give zero
starts to bring the rating even lower.

In response to the public media attention, Mormon leaks released the
following statement on March 21, 2 days after the audio went public:

“MormonLeaks™ deeply values the privacy of victims of sexual assault. We
prepared the recording of Joseph L. Bishop while coordinating
information between multiple sources, none of whom were the accuser and
it was received with no restrictions of publication. We verified its
authenticity and found it to be in line with our mission of “starting
and expanding news reporting, public commentary, and criticism related
to Mormonism” given Bishop’s blatant on tape admission to inappropriate
behavior while in a leadership position within the Mormon Church. We
eliminated all identifying information related to the victim, as is
standard protocol, in order to protect her privacy and safety.”  
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2018/03/21/mormonleaks-statement-regarding-the-publication-of-joseph-l-bishop-audio-recording/>

As media became aware of the 2010 police involvement, various
journalists reached out to the Utah county Police Department in order to
get a copy of the police report. The County initially released the
report with all but a few select words redacted. Realizing it was an
unacceptable version of the police report to release, a few hours later
they released the full report with only a few minor redactions.

The Salt Lake tribune sought a statement from the bishop who heard Jane
Doe’s accusations back in 1987 and reported the following:

“The woman who recorded her confrontation with Bishop reported her
allegations of misconduct by Bishop to her bishop in 1987, but that man
told The Tribune that he found the accusations to be “far fetched” and
declined to advance them to higher authorities in the church.”

This explains why no further action was taken when the allegations first
arose after Jane Doe returned from her mission, it seems her bishop made
a judgement call and stopped any further investigation at that time. It
is unclear why Jane waited until 2010 to pursue further accusations
after being ignored in 1987, but if I had to wage a guess, I would
assume Jane, in her mid-twenties at the time, was a newlywed and raising
a young family and didn’t have the time or energy to pursue a battle she
felt she’d inevitably lose. Nothing conclusive had happened every time
she leveled accusations in the 1980s, what reason did she have to
believe that continued pursuit would yield different results? That’s
merely my speculation, take it for what it’s worth.

The story has since been picked up by the Associated Press and reprinted
by NYT, Huffington Post, and multiple other major news outlets. It seems
clear to me that whoever wrote the AP article may not have listened to
the entire 2:44 interview as so many details are lacking in the majority
of these national articles.

The ethics of the Mormon Leaks team have come under fire for publishing
the audio without the knowledge or consent of Jane Doe. People have
claimed in various comment threads including the exmormon subreddit that
releasing this removed Jane Doe’s leverage over the Church to reach a
settlement. In a legal sense, depending on what Jane is seeking, this is
a relevant criticism. We’ll talk about this after we review the audio.

One crucial point of these accusations hinges on the existence of the
room to which Bishop brought Jane Doe and committed the alleged rape.
Now referred to in the media as a ‘rape room’ the existence of this room
would surely provide much-needed evidence that Bishop had a room to
conduct his sexual assaults. In the audio, Bishop clearly recalls the
room to which he took Jane Doe and ‘bleep’ where he committed his
alleged sexual assaults. However, the existence of this room has been
disputed. On March 22<sup>nd</sup>, KUTV reported that an anonymous
former MTC employee confirmed that the room, indeed, exists. The report
reads in part:

“A former employee tells 2News the LDS Missionary Training Center (MTC)
had a room like the one described by [a woman accusing a former mission
president of sexual
assault](http://kutv.com/news/local/lds-church-responds-to-allegations-of-sexual-assault-by-former-mission-president).

The former employee, who asked not to be identified, says the room did
have a bed, TV and VHS Player. Those details were key to the woman’s
story, first leaked by MormonLeaks on Monday, but were[ contested by
Joseph L Bishop when he spoke to Brigham Young University Police
detectives last
December](http://kutv.com/news/local/lds-official-admits-to-police-he-asked-missionary-to-expose-breasts-in-private-mtc-room).
The former employee doesn’t know the alleged victim, but recognized her
description of the unusual room in the basement of the MTC.

The employee said the room was in an otherwise unfinished area in a
lower junction part of the building. The area provided access to the
building’s water pipes, electrical lines and tunnels connected to other
campus structures. It was only accessible after passing through more
than one locked door. The employee said the room itself had no windows,
but was fully furnished inside. The furnishings included a single bed,
similar to those used in the MTC dorms, and a TV and VHS player on a
mobile cart.

2News was provided with an employment document which shows the employee
worked for BYU shortly after the time Bishop served in the MTC. BYU
students commonly work on site at the MTC. The former employee said they
were told the room was “used by the previous MTC president as a place he
would take naps and sometimes pray and also watch \[Mormon Tabernacle
Choir\] videos to help him relax.

“Based on the nature of the basement alone it would be shocking for
anyone to take a sister missionary down in that basement for any reason.
It was very dirty, dusty, \[with\] water dripping, running down the
walls. It was a dark dank smelly place,” the person told 2News. “That’s
why the fully built out little room down there was so odd. It had nice
floors, walls, ceilings but no windows. It looked like almost any other
training room in the MTC with the exception of the bed of course. It was
just really odd and totally out of place.’

The former employee told 2News they felt compelled to share their
experience after hearing Bishop’s accuser’s story. They said “There is
no earthly reason she should’ve known that room existed, and no reason
anyone should’ve been in the room alone with her.”  
<http://kutv.com/news/local/former-employee-confirms-odd-mtc-room-with-bed-and-tv>

The person who reported this to KUTV has remained anonymous for
understandable reasons, but this report is crucial to adding credibility
to Jane Doe’s allegations. If Bishop does indeed fit the mold of sexual
predator as he admits in the audio, a room like this would have been
logistically necessary for him to commit his sexual assaults. A hidden
basement room with a bed and tv/vcr combination in the pre-internet
world can only merit a few possible uses.

On March 24, Mormon Leaks released a public statement by Jane Doe which
reads in total as follows:

“I’m the woman in the recording with Joseph L. Bishop. My identity will
be revealed when I file the lawsuit.

First, although MormonLeaks did release my recording prior to my
consent, Mr. McKnight and Mr. Dodge support my cause. It is my belief
that they were concerned about ALL of the victims that may become
forgotten if my story was silenced by a settlement and non-disclosure
agreement. I cannot fault them for that. Having this story leaked has
actually helped me. I was struggling with the settlement. Part of me
wanted to take it and part of me didn’t. They made it easy for me. I
didn’t have to choose. Some have stated that I am heroic and brave. I am
neither of those things. I interviewed my rapist because I was pissed
off. The church told me I wasn’t entitled to know what action, if any,
had been taken in my reporting his raping me to several church leaders
for 30 years. I was fed up. It was neither brave nor heroic.

Part of me wanted this to go away quietly and a bigger part of me wanted
to scream from the top of the mountain what he did to me. Now I get to
scream\!

Even if the leak of the recording was prior to my consent, I do not
agree that these men are re-victimizing me. I don’t think they would
have released the recording without giving it serious thought and
weighing the consequences heavily.

I look forward to sharing more of the story in the coming weeks.”  
<https://mormonleaks.io/newsroom/2018/03/24/statement-on-behalf-of-victim-in-joseph-l-bishop-audio/>

I think we’re all looking forward to Jane Doe sharing more of the story
in the coming weeks.

This story is constantly evolving and expanding. Hopefully all of us are
caught up on the timeline of Jane Doe, Joseph Bishop, and the multiple
instances where Jane attempted to go through the proper channels to seek
justice for the alleged rape. One thing we can’t escape throughout the
past 33 years since Jane was assaulted is that she allegedly brought the
accusations to her local Church authorities multiple times, and every
single time she did, the issue was never resolved and she was
purportedly completely shut down by the Church anytime she sought
answers concerning the investigation into Bishop. The audio makes it
abundantly clear that Bishop was likely insulated from every accusation
leveled against him. It seems as if this audio recording is the first
time he was made aware that anybody was bringing up charges against him.

Bishop himself has yet to address the public. He’s 85 years old, but, as
you’ll hear in the audio momentarily, he appears to be completely cogent
and his mental faculties seem sharp. However, his son, Greg Bishop,
released a public statement addressing the audio which reads in part:

“Joseph Bishop's attorney and son, Greg Bishop, provided 2News with his
own reasons for doubting the woman's story. Bishop provided 2News with a
list of nearly two dozen incidents stating the same woman made false
accusations against individuals and companies. Those incidents include
allegedly false allegations of rape, planted evidence, and personal
injury. Some of those claims included documentation. Others did not.
Idaho attorney Craig Vernon represents Bishop's accuser. He tells 2News
that while his client has actions in her life "she wishes she could take
back," many of the claims are not true, and that Bishop's family is
"running a smear campaign" to discredit her. "The tape speaks for
itself," Vernon said.

On the tape Joseph Bishop admits that he gave a "back rub" to a female
missionary that became too "frisky." Bishop also told his accuser that
he had a "sexual addiction." He goes on say he would sometimes counsel
victims of sexual abuse in his role as mission president, but because he
"was not strong" he considered himself "the last person who should have
been in that position." He also worried about excommunication from the
Church because of his actions. He never admits to the attempted rape of
the accuser referenced on the tape, and denies ever attempting to rape
anyone else.

Greg Bishop told 2News that his father was released from the hospital
just days before the recorded confrontation. He emphasized the
interaction was arranged under false pretenses, and that he's
85-year-old father's memory has been failing. On his father's behalf "he
adamantly denies the allegations" made against him. Greg Bishop said his
father "has been retired for many years and is living quietly in
Arizona. He is not a public figure, and not of interest to anyone except
his family and loved ones."  
<http://kutv.com/news/local/lds-church-responds-to-allegations-of-sexual-assault-by-former-mission-president>

The allegations Greg Bishop leveled against Jane Doe, that she has
accused possibly a dozen other men for similar actions, have not been
substantiated to the public beyond what 2News reported. However, his
statement has been reprinted dozens of times by media outlets. Jane
Doe’s lawyer said it well, the tape speaks for itself.

Following up on a lead initially raised in the ExMormon subreddit, on 25
March, 2018, John Dehlin with Mormon Stories reported on another set of
allegations surrounding another former bishop tied with the MTC. This
man, Dr. Richard Sampson may have sexually abused missionaries while
serving as a doctor for the MTC. There will be no end to these stories
cropping up unless some systematic reforms take place immediately.

That catches us up on the story as of 26 March 2018.

Now comes the time when we’re going to deconstruct the actual audio,
play by play, and see what we can take from it. My examination of the
audio is far from exhaustive. By doing this exercise, I merely hope
you’ll understand the content of the audio if you choose not to listen
to it yourself. I will strongly recommend you do listen to it on
MormonLeaks.io so you can get a full understanding of the content,
however, if you can’t spare the 2:44, it’s my hope that this examination
will suffice to inform you.

The interview begins with proper salutations. Jane Doe operates for the
first 40 minutes under the guise of being a reporter claiming to be
writing stories about Mission Presidents. It’s abundantly clear that
Bishop had no idea who she was before the 41-minute mark. The
information at the beginning isn’t terribly relevant so we won’t discuss
it, instead we’ll pick up right where she alleges that Bishop raped her.
With permission from the Mormon Leaks team, I’ll be playing a number of
clips, we’ll begin with this clip when the interview completely shifts.
It’ll be one of the longest clips we’ll listen to, but hang in there
with me because it’s extremely relevant. The audio quality is pretty
terrible but I’m not cleaning it up or editing it in any way to keep it
in pure form. You’ll hear silences where redactions have taken place and
occasionally there will be a ‘bleep’ to denote the woman we’ve come to
know as ‘bleep’ in this timeline. Please bear with me. This clip is just
over 5 minutes long, but it contains so much relevant information. It
begins with Jane telling Bishop that she’s been working in addiction
therapy, then she goes on to accuse him of assaulting her, then she
tells Bishop that she told Elder Asay of what Bishop had done, Bishop
says he was never disciplined and gives Jane an apology. After that she
provides the details of what happened in the basement room of the MTC.
Trigger warning, this contains details of rape and this next 5 minutes
may be hard for some to get through.

1)  PLAY 41:15-46:15

46:19 46:41 Jane threatens to kill, he asks if she has biker friends,
mistakes her for another victim

46:55 47:23 Possibly mistakes her for ANOTHER victim

47:58 48:06 Admits addiction, "Lord is so forgiving"

50:05 50:47 Elder Asay interviewed Jane and Bishop never heard anything
else about it, Jane asks if it's a cover up

2)  PLAY THIS CLIP

51:12 51:58 He admits addiction, never sought treatment, tried to pray
the rape away

51:58 53:18 Hot tub breast showing in Wyoming or Utah, conversation goes
off rails

54:05 54:17 Shared story with Jane about Bishop and wife public
exposure, more grooming

54:18 55:32 Admits to taking her to room, calls himself hypocrite, prays
the rape away

55:33 57:24 Asks how many women, Jane says she left partly because of
him, shows weakness for Church defenders to jump on, doesn't get answer,
shares story of sexually abusive stepfather, Bishop 'conveniently'
doesn't remember raping her

57:24 58:01 Admits to 2, admits to third while bishop "BINGO\!\!\!"

3)  PLAY THIS CLIP

58:03 59:33 Admits to grooming and molesting woman, calls her by name,
tells of grooming details in interview with 'bleep' and Jane 'has a
thing with brother Asay’

59:35 1:00:31 Bishop says he shouldn't have been in position he was
given

1:00:31 1:01:44 Asked for money for counselors for sex abuse victims,
Packer's speech said go to bishop instead, Asay went with Packer's
advice

1:01:44 1:03:08 'bleep' tries to commit suicide, Bishop talks her down,
gets funding for counselors

1:03:08 1:04:30 'bleep' came to live with mission pres and he molested
her, "gave her back rub," confessed, never disciplined

4)  PLAY THIS CLIP

This clip starts out with Bishop saying he wanted to get out of his
position as MTC President and he petitions Elder Asay to get some
professional counselors in the MTC to help the women who’d suffered
abuse. He talks about ‘bleep’ attempting to commit suicide and what
happened to her afterwards. It should be noted that earlier in the tape,
it was revealed that ‘bleep’ had suffered some kind of abuse in her home
before she came to the MTC. She was put under Bishop’s care. This is the
‘frisky back rub’ clip.

1:04:30 1:05:24 Jane contacted Church, no response, Stake Pres, no
response, condones his honesty

1:05:24 1:06:08 Mistakes her for another possible victim in MTC basement

1:06:08 1:06:57 Wants absolution before death, keeps himself in safe
situations now

1:06:57 1:09:42 Jane has out of body experience, feels pain of abusive
stepfather, says she'd rather be herself than Bishop

We’ll talk about this in a little while.

1:09:42 1:09:56 "If story went public, Bishop would be Harvey Weinstein
of Mormon Church,” he admits he would, once again admitting assault in a
roundabout way

1:09:56 1:11:04 Admits he didn't do things to 'bleep' that had been done
to her before. He only knew through grooming interviews

5)  PLAY THIS CLIP

This next clip is where Bishop admits he would be the Harvey Weinstein
of the Mormon Church, which has all sorts of implied meanings. He also
says he didn’t do things to ‘bleep’ that others had done to her before.
We can only surmise he’d learned that ‘bleep’ had been abused before
entering the MTC through interviews with her, thus creating an
atmosphere of sexual grooming which allowed him to molest her.

1:11:40 1:12:29 Maybe backrub was all 'bleep' reported but Jane reported
to Asay what happened to her, asks point blank if it was a cover up

6)  Cover up with Asay

1:12:36 1:14:11 'You have no fucking idea the pain you've caused me and
other women'. He has addiction, never turned down a calling where he'd
have opportunities to molest again.

1:14:11 1:15:00 'It was not your first time with me' 'you are not the
only one' 'how many' goes on to tell story of woman in Argentina

1:15:00 1:15:55 Admits to two more assaults, one Argentina one Florida

7)  It was not your first time with me, confesses to two more assaults,
    one in Argentina, one in Florida

1:15:55 1:17:00 Blames no sex from wife for Florida assault, assault
'titilated me'

1:17:31 1:17:57 Jane calls him a predator, Bishop told her no one would
believe her, he apologizes again

1:17:57 1:20:11 Long screed about her experience how it should have
trauamatized her more but wasn't first rape, felt like 'nothing' Bishop
was on 'pedestal' he groomed Jane

1:20:23 1:22:18 Jane threatened to kill Bishop, called Church HQ
multiple times and never got answer. Report on police filings, never any
word back. Saw recent healdine of abuse Church said they're transparent,
Jane calls 'bullshit'

1:22:20 1:23:43 Bishop's wife knew, 'went quietly on her way' in
response to confession

1:24:09 1:25:24 Bishop can't figure out why he kept being put in
leadership roles in the Church when he had this 'problem'

1:25:43 1:26:39 If people found out church would be embarrassed, Jane
says they should be ashamed, other women are assaulted by other
priesthood holders

1:26:39 1:27:36 If anybody finds out, it would ruin his life, apologizes
again

1:27:36 1:29:31 Jane believes in repentance, Bishop admits again, Jane
says 'you're going to need a good lawyer'

1:29:31 1:30:42 Bishop says she has other options, she sticks to her
guns and says she has no other choice

1:30:42 1:32:20 Bishop goes into self-preservation mode, 'whole legacy
is fucked', he dosen't have these problems anymore

1:32:20 1:33:00 New wife was good for him, Jane accuses him of touching
her hand and looking at her breasts 3 times since she got there

1:33:00 1:34:49 Says he's flirtatious, 'it's part of your charm' 'I used
my charm for the wrong reasons'

1:36:41 1:38:21 Profusely apologizes, can't get it up anymore, has
addiction under control, apologizes again

1:38:21 1:39:51 'done all he can do' 'bullshit\! you could confess' 'I
don't remember assaulting you'

1:41:01 1:44:23 Possibly confessed to Pres. Kimball, cries in Kimball's
arms, gets a call from Kimball and gets moved to Mission Pres one week
later. 'it took me out of the situation, I was pres of Weber State and I
had reorganized the college... there was a lot of pain.'

1:44:30 1:44:43 'had spiritual experiences and I'd done this all through
my life'

1:47:52 1:48:12 Doesn't remember assaulting Jane, but doesn't surprise
him that he may have done it.... fuuuuck this guy..............

1:48:12 1:49:15 Jane doesn't know what to do with all information,
doesn't know if she can just go back to 'my little life' feels obligated
to help other women in same situation

1:49:52 1:51:02 Jane doesn't want to cause Bishop suffering, but she has
had a terrible life because of him. Bishop says 99% of Priesthood
leaders are good, God-fearing men, Jane 'bullshit\!'

1:51:02 1:54:45 calls himself hypocrite 'tries to be better' goes on
missions to 'try to be better' forced to hide all the 'shit' he did

1:54:45 1:57:32 Has a reckoning with who he is, after 1.5 hours of
conversation he finally realizes what he is and what he's done. He's
never been confronted by a victim before to see the damage he'd cause,
it's always been about him and the sinning he was doing to damage his
own salvation

1:57:33 2:00:01 Jane tells story of her husband getting the same pass
after he cheated on her. Never was punished for adultery during their
marriage. She has been so horrifically damaged by her childhood and
Bishop only exacerbated early damage at catalyzed later more significant
damage

2:00:01 2:01:16 He says he's getting better and new girlfriends love is
helping, 'that is the biggest crock of shit I have ever heard\!'

2:01:24 2:01:40 Possibly a 4th time staring at her breasts, super
awkward pause, 'no, I'm just gazing'

2:03:31 2:03:57 Bishop doesn't deserve a good legacy, it would destroy
his family

2:04:10 2:07:05 Great summary, Church has swept this under the rug

8)  This clip is a really good summary of how the Church handles these
    issues and is able to effectively sweep problems like what Bishop
    created under the rug. It’s kind of long but it perfectly captures
    everything we’ve talked about up to this point.

2:07:13 2:08:06 Where he says he has addiction and she says it's gone
untreated for 85 years, he feels it's taken care of

2:08:40 2:09:35 'Hi, I'm Joe, I'm a sexual predator, I've been clean
x-number of years'

9)  Here he equates sexual addiction with alcohol addiction

2:09:35 2:11:16 He's overcome his addiction, he's not the same man he
used to be, 'trying to rape a missionary is not normal'

2:11:16 2:14:19 Doesn't know if he can be forgiven, his position made
his sins more grevious, Jane will live alone, Bishop will die soon, Jane
refuses to let her daughter be put in position she was in

2:17:45 2:19:03 Should have been seventy but Asay and Wells knew about
rape addiction and kept him from ascending to GA position, 'could have
been great'

10) This is an important clip. Bishop claims that Asay put his name in
    the hat to become a member of the Quorum of Seventy, but he didn’t
    ever get the position. He says he knows why, eluding to sex abuse
    allegations clouding his record. This illustrates that the higher
    ups knew of his

2:19:38 2:21:31 Turned down Sunday School calling to avoid dangerous
situation, like alcoholic driving past liquor store

2:21:50 2:23:35 'I'm still in Lord's hands' spared his life to have this
meeting to beg forgiveness

2:24:05 2:25:13 Doesn't want his name out there, doesn't want people to
find out about other side of his character

2:26:42 2:27:25 'I'm looking at the next world' he'll be judged, has
checkered past, 'tried to do what's right'

2:29:11 2:35:07 Husband wife couple in MTC, few weeks later he was
removed for unclear reasons, 'had sister missionary besieged with evil
spirits' he dealt with spirits, confessed again with no discipline,
Kimball during Sao Paulo temple dedication told Bishop to cast out
personal evil spirits, tried again to self-treat unsuccessfully, soon
after this was made MTC mission pres

2:36:45 2:37:58 'you have so much to do before you \[die\]' Bishop
thought he had repented, but now realizes this is what repentance is,
wants to confess everything to bishop or SP

2:39:06 2:40:18 Jane weighs her options and tells what she's done
legally speaking in prep for the interview, admits to blindsiding and
being deceitful to get interview

2:40:49 2:41:36 Weighing out options, says they'll talk soon about this,
'this is gonna destroy my life'

2:41:39 2:43:32 'be careful of attorneys' goes on to detail his
financial state that this revelation would ruin him, if only that would
have occurred to him before he tried to fucking rape her...

Conclusion:

We have a lot of information floating out there, so what can we take
away from all of it?

The fundamental flaw when it comes to issues of sexual assault and these
various improprieties is the fact that at the end of the day it usually
all boils down to a he-said vs. she-said situation. If a court of law
doesn’t have DNA evidence or a preponderance of corroborated witness
testimonies, it’s like the assault never happened. But what can or can’t
be proven in a court of law has nothing to do with the victims and how a
sexual assault or rape changes their lives. Stories like this aren’t
just allegations yet to be proven in a court of law, they’re human
beings who had a life changing experience when their timelines happened
to collide.

Something we can’t forget, we’re all human beings. With the exception of
Jane Doe and Joseph Bishop, we’re unaffected personally by this story,
but many of us are emotionally invested with trying to make sense of the
situation. In order to move forward from this collectively, we need to
understand and validate why people are saying what they’re saying about
Jane Doe and Joseph Bishop. We all have opinions about this.

MormonNewsroom has been interesting to watch as the story unfolds.

Feminist Mormon Housewives has been quite interesting to watch as well.

Whichever side of this story you find yourself, the tribes have
balkanized. Everybody is using language familiar to them to describe
what they find most relevant in the story.

Here’s a few examples in the immediate aftermath:

From Mormon Newsroom:

“This matter was brought to the attention of the Church in 2010, when
this former Church member, who served briefly as a missionary in 1984…

If the allegations of sexual assault are true, it would be a tragic
betrayal of our standards and would result in action by the Church to
formally discipline any member who was guilty of such behavior,
especially someone in a position of trust.

We share the anger and distress Church members and others feel to learn
of incidents where those entrusted with sacred responsibilities violate
God’s commandments and harm others. Such behavior is repulsive and
sinful.

In the course of that investigation, both she and Mr. Bishop have been
interviewed by outside legal counsel. Not surprisingly, the stories,
timelines and recollections of those involved are dramatically
different.”

From Katie L. on Feminist Mormon Housewives:

“First, if you are only going to discipline abusers who meet the burden
of proof required by law, you have just given a green light to
predators, who rely on the fact that sexual assault is notoriously
difficult to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, and that the vast majority
of sexual assaults go unreported, in order to operate. This is NOT the
standard of evidence required in a situation like this and the notion
that it would be is utterly absurd. Your job is to protect your people,
not to prosecute crimes. Stop hiding behind attorneys and police
investigations and do your duty as religious leaders, for the love of
God.

Second, the betrayal at the heart of this issue is not this man’s
betrayal of your precious purity standards, which are frankly
irrelevant. It is *your* betrayal of the people who put their trust in
you. Your failure to protect those who give you their bodies, lives, and
souls. Your willingness to put people with no pastoral training,
background checks, or vetting of any kind into positions of high
leadership while extracting covenants of obedience to those same leaders
upon penalty of eternal separation from family.”

Did you catch all the buzzwords and signals from Mormon Newsroom?
‘betrayal of our standards’ ‘formally discipline’ ‘someone in a
position of trust’ ‘sacred responsibilities violate God’s commandments’
‘not surprisingly, the stories timelines and recollections are
dramatically different’ ‘a former Church member who briefly served as a
missionary’

Those are all buzzwords to signal to members that the Church is in
control of what’s happening, and Jane Doe is an apostate who left her
mission early and is therefore untrustworthy. Nothing is said of the
illegality of the alleged rape, the Church merely paints a picture of
itself as an unaffected overseer who condemns these actions from afar,
never acknowledging their hand in the process. But they’ve exercised a
lot of power in the last 33 years since Jane Doe first accused Bishop,
the power has been wielded by authority figures in the Church who took
Bishop’s confessions and never referred him, Jane Doe, or ‘bleep’ to
proper state authorities.

What about the buzzwords from Feminist Mormon Housewives? ‘the betrayal
is not this man’s betrayal of your precious purity standards’ ‘your
failure to protect those who give you their bodies, lives, and souls’
‘put people with no pastoral training, background checks, or vetting
of any kind into positions of high leadership while extracting covenants
of obedience to those same leaders upon penalty of eternal separation
from family’

All of these catchphrases and buzzwords employed by both sides of the
issue have deeply implied meanings to the majority of people reading the
posts, but I would contend that trying to explain all the deeper implied
meanings and context of these words and phrases to somebody who knows
nothing of Mormonism and English isn’t their first language would be
quite a challenge.

Don’t get me wrong, I’m not saying any of this to cast aspersions at any
side, I’m merely telling the story as it happened and acknowledging that
we’re all talking past each other and using language our audiences
understand.

There are so many ways to view this story and the fundamental issues it
exposes. It’s been a struggle to find anybody talking about the real
victims in this story, everybody. I don’t say that to somehow diminish
the fact that Jane Doe is a victim of Joseph Bishop, I’m saying that
because they’re both victims of a system. No single person is
responsible for creating this system as it currently stands, we just all
contribute in small ways to not fixing it when victims are forever
harmed by it. To say that Jane Doe is the only victim in this debacle
would be ignoring the circumstances which led to what happened in the
first place.

Let me qualify that a little bit. I’m going to share one last clip from
the audio with you because I believe it illustrates a certain empathy
shared between Jane and Joseph Bishop which is extremely rare in
scenarios involving sexual assault. To preface it, Jane describes her
near-death experience at a young age wherein she feels that she exited
her body briefly and witnessed some amazing things. She describes seeing
the world through her abusive stepfather’s eyes and concludes with
saying she wouldn’t want to live in Joseph Bishop’s shoes after feeling
the pain her stepfather had felt for abusing her.

11) Out of body experience

The system failed everyone here. Jane was assaulted and Bishop has lived
with the guilt of assaulting multiple women and both parties never got
help when they needed it the most. They both turned to the Church
multiple times for protection, yet the Church arguably exacerbated the
problem for everybody involved.

Bishop knew he was going to do wrong by assaulting women but he didn’t
have anywhere to go to get help. He’s a victim of the same system Jane
Doe is, just from a different perspective. Jane Doe didn’t have anywhere
to turn either because every time she tried to get justice or even tried
to get somebody to simply recognize what happened, she was stonewalled
because the Church looks out for its own and she was an outside
antagonist of a trusted Priesthood holder.

We need to understand what it is we’re working with. Former Mormon
listeners may empathize more with what I’m about to say than current
believers, but I’m going to use a specific field of psychological study
to make my point. I’m invoking that ever-feared C-word. Forget
everything you know about cults and let’s work strictly with a clinical
definition. Try to dissociate the headlines about cults in the past 60
years and let’s work from the same definition.

Steven Hassan’s BITE model of Cult Mind Control came up in the interview
with ex-Jehovah’s Witness Lydia Finch a few episodes ago, but I want to
explore how the BITE model manifests in detail from Hassan’s website,
freedomofmind.com. The word ‘cult’ is a powerful word, but it needn’t
carry the weight of negative connotation typically ascribed, and I’ll
let Steven Hassan tell you why.

“Many people think of mind control as an ambiguous, mystical process
that cannot be defined in concrete terms. In reality, mind control
refers to a specific set of methods and techniques, such as hypnosis or
thought- stopping, that influence how a person thinks, feels, and acts.
Like many bodies of knowledge, it is not inherently good or evil. If
mind control techniques are used to empower an individual to have more
choice, and authority for his life remains within himself, the effects
can be beneficial. For example, benevolent mind control can be used to
help people quit smoking without affecting any other behavior. Mind
control becomes destructive when the locus of control is external and it
is used to undermine a person’s ability to think and act independently.

As employed by the most destructive cults, mind control seeks nothing
less than to disrupt an individual’s authentic identity and reconstruct
it in the image of the cult leader. I developed the BITE model to help
people determine whether or not a group is practicing destructive mind
control. The BITE model helps people understand how cults suppress
individual member's uniqueness and creativity. BITE stands for the
cult's control of an individual's Behavior, Intellect \[information\],
Thoughts, and Emotions.

It is important to understand that destructive mind control can be
determined when the overall effect of these four components promotes
dependency and obedience to some leader or cause. It is not necessary
for every single item on the list to be present. Mindcontrolled cult
members can live in their own apartments, have nine-to-five jobs, be
married with children, and still be unable to think for themselves and
act independently.

We are all subject to influence from our parents, friends, teachers,
co-workers... When this influence helps someone grow and maintain an
internal locus of control, it is healthy. Influence which is used to
keep people mindless and dependent is unhealthy.”

Quick breakdown of what these controlling mechanisms look like:

“Behavior Control

1\. Regulate individual’s physical reality   
2\. Dictate where, how, and with whom the member lives and associates or
isolates   
3\. When, how and with whom the member has sex   
4\. Control types of clothing and hairstyles   
5\. Regulate diet - food and drink, hunger and/or fasting   
6\. Manipulation and deprivation of sleep   
7\. Financial exploitation, manipulation or dependence   
8\. Restrict leisure, entertainment, vacation time   
9\. Major time spent with group indoctrination and rituals and/or self
indoctrination including the Internet   
10\. Permission required for major decisions   
11\. Thoughts, feelings, and activities (of self and others) reported to
superiors   
12\. Rewards and punishments used to modify behaviors, both positive and
negative   
13\. Discourage individualism, encourage group-think  
14\. Impose rigid rules and regulations  
15\. Instill dependency and obedience   
16\. Threaten harm to family and friends  
17\. Force individual to rape or be raped  
18\. Instill dependency and obedience  
19\. Encourage and engage in corporal punishment 

Information Control

1\. Deception:   
   a. Deliberately withhold information   
   b. Distort information to make it more acceptable   
   c. Systematically lie to the cult member   
2\. Minimize or discourage access to non-cult sources of information,
including:   
   a. Internet, TV, radio, books, articles, newspapers, magazines, other
media   
   b.Critical information   
   c. Former members   
   d. Keep members busy so they don’t have time to think and
investigate   
   e. Control through cell phone with texting, calls, internet
tracking   
3\. Compartmentalize information into Outsider vs. Insider doctrines   
   a. Ensure that information is not freely accessible   
   b.Control information at different levels and missions within
group   
   c. Allow only leadership to decide who needs to know what and when   
4\. Encourage spying on other members   
   a. Impose a buddy system to monitor and control member   
   b.Report deviant thoughts, feelings and actions to leadership   
   c. Ensure that individual behavior is monitored by group   
5\. Extensive use of cult-generated information and propaganda,
including:   
   a. Newsletters, magazines, journals, audiotapes, videotapes, YouTube,
movies and other media   
   b. Misquoting statements or using them out of context from non-cult
sources   
6\. Unethical use of confession   
   a. Information about sins used to disrupt and/or dissolve identity
boundaries   
   b. Withholding forgiveness or absolution   
   c. Manipulation of memory, possible false memories

Thought Control

1\. Require members to internalize the group’s doctrine as truth   
   a. Adopting the group's ‘map of reality’ as reality   
   b. Instill black and white thinking   
   c. Decide between good vs. evil   
   d. Organize people into us vs. them (insiders vs. outsiders)   
2.Change person’s name and identity   
3\. Use of loaded language and clichés which constrict knowledge, stop
critical thoughts and reduce complexities into platitudinous buzz
words   
4\. Encourage only ‘good and proper’ thoughts   
5\. Hypnotic techniques are used to alter mental states, undermine
critical thinking and even to age regress the member   
6\. Memories are manipulated and false memories are created   
7\. Teaching thought-stopping techniques which shut down reality testing
by stopping negative thoughts and allowing only positive thoughts,
including:   
   a. Denial, rationalization, justification, wishful thinking   
   b. Chanting   
   c. Meditating   
   d. Praying   
   e. Speaking in tongues   
   f. Singing or humming   
8\. Rejection of rational analysis, critical thinking, constructive
criticism   
9\. Forbid critical questions about leader, doctrine, or policy
allowed   
10\. Labeling alternative belief systems as illegitimate, evil, or not
useful

Emotional Control

1\. Manipulate and narrow the range of feelings – some emotions and/or
needs are deemed as evil, wrong or selfish   
2\. Teach emotion-stopping techniques to block feelings of homesickness,
anger, doubt   
3\. Make the person feel that problems are always their own fault, never
the leader’s or the group’s fault   
4\. Promote feelings of guilt or unworthiness, such as   
   a. Identity guilt   
   b. You are not living up to your potential   
   c. Your family is deficient   
   d. Your past is suspect   
   e. Your affiliations are unwise   
   f. Your thoughts, feelings, actions are irrelevant or selfish   
   g. Social guilt   
   h. Historical guilt   
5\. Instill fear, such as fear of:   
   a. Thinking independently   
   b. The outside world   
   c. Enemies   
   d. Losing one’s salvation   
   e. Leaving or being shunned by the group   
   f. Other’s disapproval   
6\. Extremes of emotional highs and lows – love bombing and praise one
moment and then declaring you are horrible sinner   
7\. Ritualistic and sometimes public confession of sins   
8\. Phobia indoctrination: inculcating irrational fears about leaving
the group or questioning the leader’s authority   
   a. No happiness or fulfillment possible outside of the group   
   b. Terrible consequences if you leave: hell, demon possession,
incurable diseases, accidents, suicide, insanity, 10,000 reincarnations,
etc.  
   c. Shunning of those who leave; fear of being rejected by friends,
peers, and family   
   d. Never a legitimate reason to leave; those who leave are weak,
undisciplined, unspiritual, worldly, brainwashed by family or counselor,
or seduced by money, sex, or rock and roll   
   e. Threats of harm to ex-member and family”

This BITE model has become the standard to determine if any given
movement is a cult. Notice at no point in all that does it say anything
about belief in God, that’s because cults manifest themselves in many
social movements. It also states unequivocally that having a cult
mindset can be beneficial in some respects. If whatever culture you’re a
part of encourages healthy habits and promotes individuality, then it’s
a good cult. However, that word carries so much negative connotation as
it’s usually ascribed to wacky religious groups which frequently
terminate in mass-suicides, yet cults exist all around us as smaller
groups within much larger social groups or movements. It would do us all
a great service to drop the social stigma of the word ‘cult’ and
appropriate the term to come into line with a more clinical and
scientific definition.

The first step to dealing with a problem is identifying it. There isn’t
a single victim in all of this, everybody has been victimized by the
culture of this specific cult. We can’t move forward from this or talk
about any rational solutions until we collectively stop victimizing
everybody and get everybody the help they need and deserve. We owe it to
each other to identify and understand what’s happened and help each
other see the Church for what it is. Then we can identify the good and
the bad which comes from this cult.

If there’s one takeaway from this interaction with Jane Doe and Joseph
Bishop it should be a conclusion that somebody could have stepped in to
help them both in multiple places during their respective timelines.
Somebody could have helped Jane by giving her the tools and therapy
necessary to deal with what Joseph Bishop and her stepfather did to her.
Somebody could have stepped in to help Joseph Bishop get the tools and
therapy he needed to express his sexuality in ways that are healthy
instead of simply labeling it sex addiction and looking the other way
when he creates victims by expressing his sexuality in unhealthy ways.

Sex is such a weird thing in the Church. It dances the fine line of
secret and sacred. We’re not supposed to talk about or even entertain
sexual feelings or desires until we’re married when everything becomes
fair game. That’s not healthy. People have sexual feelings and desires
starting in childhood yet we tell them that these emotions are
unacceptable to explore or express in any way until after our missions
and marriages. The only place we can discuss sexuality is with our
bishop one-on-one behind closed doors and the only reason we discuss it
there is to confess our sexual sins, thus perpetuating the cycle of
self-loathing and shame for simply having sexual desires.

But what are the obstacles to fixing the problem here? Members of the
Church are inherently opposed to any bottom up fixes. They know the
Church is led by God’s representatives on earth. This mentality means
that top-down changes are the only changes to be accepted, discouraging
any grassroots movements from having any serious impact.

This mentality isn’t something that is recent in the Church, criticism
is always hard to take from outside sources.

Dallin Oaks said in the February 1987 Ensign article titled “Criticism”

“Evil speaking of the Lord’s anointed is in a class by itself. It is one
thing to depreciate a person who exercises corporate power or even
government power. It is quite another thing to criticize or depreciate a
person for the performance of an office to which he or she has been
called of God. It does not matter that the criticism is true.”

Any time an issue arises in the Church which may signal that a
systematic problem exists, the problem is waved away with phrases
all-too common in Mormon circles. The Church is led by God but made up
of fallible men. The gospel is perfect, the people are flawed.

It’s a challenge to reconcile the mentality behind those statements with
evidence that there may be a problem which needs to be fixed within the
Church. Members don’t see the Church as an institution which shares any
similarities with any other institution. They’re quick to cast
aspersions at other religions or corporations which suffer from sex
abuse scandals while at the same time lacking the introspection to
wonder if those same issues may be present within the Church itself. The
Church isn’t like any other organization on the planet because it’s the
one true religion. How can the one true religion following the perfect
gospel of Jesus Christ have any problems?

We can’t move forward in a conversation about this subject until we
understand the conflicting interests and empathize with everybody who is
somehow affected by the Church, especially when challenging stories like
Jane Doe and Joseph Bishop inevitably surface.

While we’re trying to have these conversations across the belief
spectrum, it’s important to take steps toward fixing the problem in any
way we can. Think back on every time we heard ecclesiastical leaders or
Church leaders to whom these women and Bishop reported the sexual abuse
or ‘sex addiction’. Each of those times it was a bishop or stake
president who took the accusations. Every time Joseph Bishop himself
confessed what he called his sexual addiction, it was always to a Church
authority, his bishop or stake president, and explicitly we know he
confessed to multiple members of the Quorum of the Seventy.

Each of these instances represents the structure the Church has in place
to police these matters internally. When the matters are referred to the
proper secular authorities, this policing is good; you need checks and
balances in a system to catch bad actors. However, as we see from this
example and multiple others which have made Mormon headlines in the last
few years, more often than not it seems the Church reviews the available
accusations, commits the person to a regiment of repentance, and the
matter is forgiven and forgotten. Legally speaking, any time this is the
case it may equate to covering up for sexual abuse within Church
leadership.

The only way Joseph Bishop was able to get these women into scenarios
where he could allegedly assault them was because he had spoken with
them concerning sexual matters prior to the assaults. The Church has
created a culture where an older man asking young men and women sexually
explicit questioning behind closed doors is a completely normal
experience. Bishop groomed these women and the Church had unwittingly
groomed them from a young age during every bishop’s interview where that
question is asked, “Do you keep the law of chastity?”. These women
Bishop allegedly assaulted were indoctrinated in a culture where people
shouldn’t be on their guard when an older man with the priesthood takes
them into a room one-on-one and asks sexual questions. Without this
aspect of culture, they may have had their guard up and not gone into
the basement room with him alone, they may have taken steps to stop this
before it got too far.

Beyond that, if the culture hadn’t existed where ecclesiastical
punishment effectively substitutes for legal punishment, Bishop may have
been referred to authorities in the late 70s when it seems his sexual
indiscretions allegedly began.

Given all of this information, there has never been a more crucial time
to march in support of systematic reforms within the Church. Everything
we’ve discussed today is exactly what the Protect LDS Children campaign
is fighting. The march is at the end of this week, March 30, 2018,
beginning in Washington Square park at noon, that’s 451 South State St.
in Salt Lake City. Sam Young has devoted so many hours to putting this
march together and you can read the stories of people who’ve been
affected by these sexually invasive bishop’s interviews and sign the
petition at protectldschildren.org. This march isn’t to change Church
doctrine or history, it’s a matter of changing its policies to comport
with every other major world-wide institution of the 21<sup>st</sup>
century. If changing how these bishop’s interviews from how they’re
currently conducted stops even one more story like Jane Doe and Joseph
Bishop from arising ever again, it would be simply absurd and almost
criminal to oppose the movement. I hope to see you there.

One interesting aspect to arise in the wake of these allegations comes
from the Church’s statement on 21 March.

“The Church, as a religious organization, does not have the
investigative tools available to law enforcement agencies. Nor can the
Church substitute for the courts in adjudicating legal claims. The
Church has great faith in the judicial system to determine the truth of
these claims. Nevertheless, the Church takes seriously its
responsibility to hold its members accountable for their conduct with
respect of the laws of God and man. To that end, the Church is
continuing its investigation of this individual's claims and will act
consistent with its long-standing policy of no tolerance for abuse.”  
<https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/article/statement-former-mission-president-alleged-abuse-joseph-l-bishop-march-2018>

This alone seems to put the Church in an awkward position where it’s
been handling the matters internally, yet simultaneously admits that
they don’t have the resources to follow up on these leads. This may be
the closest thing we get to a cry for help from the Church with policing
sex abuse within its ranks. While not a legally binding statement by any
stretch of imagination, maybe we should consider reading between the
lines and help with an outside watchdog committee to help curtail the
constant threat of abuse.

I’m merely trying to examine this in every way that makes sense. One
major takeaway from everything today is the fact that sexuality is such
and interesting aspect of the human experience. I don’t think it’s right
to give the Church or Joseph Bishop an out when it comes to what
occurred from the available evidence surrounding these rape allegations.
People are justifiably outraged with how everything looks right now and
we’ll see how the story develops in the coming weeks.

In order to help me examine this from a legal perspective, I’ve invited
someone I consider to be an intellectual heavy-hitter when it comes to
examining the law from a nuanced and skeptical perspective. He’s a
graduate of the Harvard law program and has worked in business law for

ANDREW INTERVIEW

Andrew questions:

Leak reduce Jane Doe’s leverage?

Final: Hypothetically, could Bishop claim religious exemption on
polygamy in a deep red state?

Shouldn’t we be exploring any possible solutions, even novel ones? It
doesn’t seem from the available evidence that the interaction between
Bishop and Jane Doe was consensual. What seems to have happened is
unequivocally wrong. From the evidence in front of us, it looks like
Joseph Bishop was in a position of power and used that position to force
himself upon Jane Doe. That is straight up condemnable and truly
immoral.

Based on the conversation with Andrew just now, what seems most likely
is that this story will continue to get bigger until Jane files her
lawsuit where it will be litigated and settled out of court for $X
dollars. Jane will get the money and sign an NDA with the Church, and
the Church might change one of its policies to legally protect
themselves from this happening in the future. Jane will join the ranks
of unknown numbers of survivors who’ve been silenced. But all the public
gets out of this is the Church slightly changing one or two of its
policies, hardly what one might consider a win at the end of the day.

Is there a more novel solution out there where major changes can be
affected and we’re all better off at the end of the day? If a solution
like that may exist, isn’t it worth exploring, even as merely a thought
experiment?

Under different hypothetical circumstances where all parties are
informed consenting adults, should a man and a woman be barred from
sharing consenting intimate relations? That’s a separate issue. But if
we don’t take anything from this story and Jane Doe is bought off and
silenced at the end of the day, have we actually fixed any institutional
problems?

Our culture treats sex in a weird way. One man and one woman for sex and
marriage has been the status quo for centuries, but at a different time
in Utah, before it was a state, the status quo was different. Polygamy
was practiced underground because it runs contrary to federal marriage
laws, but could a system be crafted which allows multiple consenting
adults without respect to age, race, gender, or gender identity, to
marry and grant them all necessary legal protections? A major issue with
polygamy is that it’s illegal and those engaged in the practice don’t
get any legal recourse. It’s also religiously based which creates an
inherent misogynistic power dynamic which is inversely related to true
informed consent. I’m not talking about legalizing polygyny, where one
man gets to marry multiple women, but maybe we should consider revising
the antiquated laws of one man one woman and explore the possibility of
opening up marriage laws to include any number of informed consenting
adults.

And look, I understand this is disturbingly complex and this may not be
the right avenue or time to discuss such things, but if we can move the
world in a better direction as a result of what has transpired, isn’t
that worth exploring at the very least? The hurtles are very real. What
does an informed consenting polygamous relationship look like? How are
resources divided up when a polygamous marriage inevitably sours and
divorce is the only option? How does child support work when we have
multiple men and women all in a polygamous marriage and one person
decides for whatever reason to cut ties?

This would be a major shift in what we understand marriage to be today.
We’d have to have a plethora of sex and relationship therapists to
study, document, and provide advice for people on what an informed
polygamous marriage looks like. There couldn’t be restrictions regarding
gender or gender identity, it would need to be completely sex and gender
neutral. The long-term impact might manifest in many men and women be
married together, affording legal protections to all those involved. The
issues of cheating and covert adultery may solve themselves. Also,
children who today are born out of wedlock, may gain legal protections
and recourse.

I know this is a pipe dream, but if it’s a solution with better outcomes
for the people involved, isn’t it worth thought experimenting with in a
purely hypothetical realm?

It’s a challenge to consider what LDS opposition may look like to such a
hypothetical proposition. One need only to look to the Doctrine and
Covenants to know that the original monogamy revelation, D\&C 101 in the
1835 version, was removed, whereas the polygamy revelation D\&C 132
still stands as divine doctrine. Joseph Smith was sealed to multiple men
and women in Nauvoo through plural marriage and the law of adoption. As
a country we’re still wallowing in strict monogamy instated since the
Protestant foundations of the colonies. Joseph Smith hid his polygamy
because it was illegal. He was a victim of a sex-shaming culture which
disapproved of universal marriage much like our society today. Sex
scandals shouldn’t be a problem in our culture, but people express their
sexuality in unhealthy ways when it’s contrary to the approved societal
norm. We’re all victims of unhealthy views on sex, but it doesn’t have
to be this way.

I propose the Church merely act in accordance with their own
foundational scripture. In Alma 24, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies took action to
stop the great conflict of their time.

“17 And now it came to pass that when the king had made an end of these
sayings, and all the people were assembled together, they took their
swords, and all the weapons which were used for the shedding of man’s
blood, and they did bury them up deep in the earth.

18 And this they did, it being in their view a testimony to God, and
also to men, that they never would use weapons again for the shedding of
man’s blood; and this they did, vouching and covenanting with God, that
rather than shed the blood of their brethren they would give up their
own lives; and rather than take away from a brother they would give unto
him; and rather than spend their days in idleness they would labor
abundantly with their hands.

19 And thus we see that, when these Lamanites were brought
to believe and to know the truth, they were firm, and would suffer
even unto death rather than commit sin; and thus we see that they buried
their weapons of peace, or they buried the weapons of war, for peace.”

Why not explore the possibility of an indefinite armistice when it comes
to the battle of love and marriage? Let’s end this seemingly
never-ending battle about approved or unapproved love and sexuality. Our
weapons today are online forums and legal firms, let’s get them out of
the fight about sex and marriage. Let us collectively lay down our
weapons for peace and move on from this trifling issue which has little
impact on who we are as human beings. It should be up to individuals to
practice healthy sex and live fulfilling lives.

That’s the only way that I can see any end to the legal game we play
back and forth with the Church and its members. This isn’t a simple
solution. Full legal polygamy regardless of sex and gender identity
isn’t a solution which will immediately fix everything, there will be
obstacles for decades to come. This is a plan to end the back and forth
long after this current generation has died. This is a possibility which
would require centuries of applying the scientific method to
understanding optimal polygamous marriages and consensual practices. We
shouldn’t legalize polygamy because it’s easy, but because it is hard.
We should never judge a person’s worth based on their sexuality.

But we have to stop with thought-killing rhetoric and controlling
mechanisms. We have to stop with stuff like this from Richard G. Scott
in his 1992 General Conference address.

12) Richard G. Scott victim blaming

Victim blaming has to stop RIGHT NOW. Until we recognize that we’re all
victims of the system in one way or another, progress will be too slow
to chart.

And if I may leave you with one final quote from D\&C 121 which I think
illustrates the greatest obstacle against society progressing our views
around sexuality. This was given by Joseph Smith when he was interred in
Liberty Jail awaiting trial for arson, robbery, and treason tied to the
1838 Mormon War in Missouri.

Final quote to end show:

D\&C 121:39

“We have learned, by sad experience, that it is the nature and
disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority,
as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous
dominion.”

Come to the march.

I want to give props to the media outlets and various people who’ve been
covering this story. Peggy Fletcher Stack of the SL Tribune has been an
unstoppable force throughout the development of this story and her
treatment has been evidence-based and fair. I’ve used a number of her
articles in compiling the research for this episode. Another notable
reporter, Tad Walch of the Deseret News deserves some props. Look, this
story is rough for believing members of the Church to cover and the
reasons for that should be abundantly apparent by this point. Tad Walch
hasn’t shied away from some of the challenging aspects of this story and
he’s been relatively fair with such a controversial issue. Jonathan
Streeter, you may know him as thinker of thoughts, he runs the Thoughts
on Things and Stuff youtube and social media. Jonathan has been covering
this story almost daily since it broke and his videos have been
extremely helpful in putting words to some powerful emotions surrounding
this complicated issue. A huge shoutout to the various bloggers on
Feminist Mormon Housewives for offering their much-needed perspective on
the issue. Thanks to John Dehlin and Lindsay Hansen Park for covering
these stories and chiming in with their two cents. They’ve provided a
plethora of useful information with everything happening. You can check
the show notes for the list of sources used to compile this. Thanks to
all the thousands of redditors posting and upvoting for visibility and
huge thanks to the Mormon Leaks team for deciding to post the audio in
the first place even though it’s an issue with so many moving parts and
conflicting interests. I think this leak exhibits Mormon Leaks’
commitment to transparency, regardless of the ancillary ramifications.
