---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 104 – Book of Abraham Spiritual plus Lesley Butterfield'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-104-book-abraham-spiritual-plus-lesley-butterfield/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-104-book-of-abraham-spiritual-plus-lesley-butterfield
category: History
date: 2018-05-25 01:52:36 +0000
---

Ep 104 -- Book of Abraham Spiritual plus Lesley Butterfield

On this episode, we dive into the actual content of the Book of Abraham
in our continued examination of the history of the book. We read
extracts of each chapter with a bit of study guide along the way. We
cover Abraham's story arc in the book, the deeper doctrines and
teachings which come from the Book, and we examine some of the cultural
milieu from whence the Book of Abraham arose. We cover Joseph's
rewriting of the Genesis creation narrative, racism within the books of
Mormon canon, and the Hebrew root of 'Kolob'. What would it take to get
rid of some of these pieces of doctrine, canon, and theology in the
modern Church? After that we're joined by Lesley Butterfield of
Unrighteous Dominion to discuss abuse in its many manifestations within
the culture of the LDS Church.

Links:

Book of Abraham Study Guide\
<https://www.lds.org/manual/the-pearl-of-great-price-student-manual/the-book-of-abraham?lang=eng>

Book of Abraham and Facsimiles\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/book-of-abraham-and-facsimiles-1-march-16-may-1842/11>

Egyptian Human Sacrifice\
<http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/humansac.htm>

Dynastic timeline of Egypt\
<http://www.touregypt.net/hdyn1.htm>

Mark of Cain\
<https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/366381-what-is-the-mark-of-cain-in-the-book-of-mormon>

Book of Moses\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/old-testament-revision-1/2#full-transcript>

Bible Chronology of Abraham\
<http://biblehub.com/timeline/>

Kolob as Sirius\
<https://bycommonconsent.com/2006/11/18/kolob-as-sirius/>

Improvement Era 1913 Kolob as Sirius\
<https://archive.org/stream/improvementera1605unse/improvementera1605unse_djvu.txt>

'Kolob' as 'Man-whore' "Ain't Nothing but a Hound Dog"\
<http://www.academia.edu/1167730/Aint_Nothing_But_a_Hound_Dog_The_meaning_of_the_noun_klb_in_Northwest_Semitic_Languages_in_light_of_BT_Rosh_Hashannah_4a>

The Vanity of Arts and Sciences by Agrippa\
<https://archive.org/details/vanityartsandsc00unkngoog>

Astronomy and the Book of Abraham\
<http://www.ldsgospeldoctrine.net/ddd/ddd-ot02.pdf>

First and Second Estate doctrine\
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Second_Estate>

Lesley Butterfield and Unrighteous Dominion\
<https://www.unrighteousdominion.org/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The Book of Abraham may be an obscure piece of Mormon canon, but it
holds some pieces of doctrine and theology which set Mormonism apart
from other Protestant sects of Christianity. It's been interesting, the
Book of Abraham is a tough subject to study from the chapel-attender's
perspective without getting lost down the rabbit hole of apologetics.
There aren't any general conference talks that I could find. There are
plenty of apologists talking, writing, and making videos about it, but
very little by way of official releases. That intro clip was from the
YouTube channel 3 Mormons which is a few millennials talking about
issues within the Church, and it's funded by the Church, but even 3
Mormons isn't official Church statement. The Book of Abraham is tough to
nail down.

Today, we continue our 3-part examination of the Book of Abraham. Part
one was the physical, tracking the papyri collection and the cultural
milieu which brought Egyptology to prominence in Western cultures. For
part 2, we're going to examine the spiritual aspect of the book to see
exactly what Mormon doctrine comes specifically from the claimed papyri
pages the Church purchased from the Egyptian Antiquities dealer, Michael
Chandler, in July 1835. We'll be reading a number of extracts from it
and using LDS approved study guides to try and garner an understanding
of how Mormon doctrine evolved once this book was 'translated' and
printed in March of 1842 in Nauvoo, Illinois. If you're looking for the
slam-dunk arguments which prove the Book of Abraham false, you'll have
to tune in to next week's episode when we go through the logical aspect
of the Book of Abraham, we're focusing on the spiritual and doctrinal
side for today.

Let's dive right in. The introduction from the online version of the
Book of Abraham says the following:

"A Translation of some ancient Records that have fallen into our hands
from the catacombs of Egypt, purporting to be the writings of Abraham
while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written by his own
hand, upon papyrus."

That "purporting to be" was removed in 1878 in the 2^nd^ edition, but we
discussed that and the resulting effect last episode.

Anyone who reads through the Book of Abraham will find it sounds awfully
similar to another book of Mormon scripture, Genesis. In fact, the
majority of the Book of Abraham is merely a rewriting and interpolation
of Genesis in many ways. To be clear, this book claims to be written by
Abraham himself, but no writing by Abraham actually exists. What we know
of Abraham's life and timeline comes from the authors of the Pentateuch
where he's featured as a descendant of Adam and Eve, born in Ur, or
present-day Mugheir, Iraq. Enoch descended from Adam, Noah and the flood
followed Enoch, and the tower of Babel came soon afterward, which all
preceded father Abraham. According to Genesis, with absolutely no
contemporary records to verify this, Abraham was supposedly born around
2000 B.C.E., and was the father of Isaac, who he nearly sacrificed on
the altar, and the grandfather of Jacob, who became Israel. All that
happens within the first 40 chapters of the Book of Genesis.

It's worth noting, these dates are only internally consistent and the
majority of them were ascribed during the early enlightenment period by
Archbishop Ussher. That means nearly all of the events I just described
from the Bible only happen in the Bible which began as early Hebrew oral
traditions. Around the purported time of Solomon's temple in 1000 B.C.E.
is when contemporary evidence of some biblical people and events
actually come into play from non-bible author sources and many of the
claimed dates are wildly inaccurate and falsifiable by these
contemporary sources. If one were to assert that all of these people in
Genesis are merely legends and myths, a person would be at extreme pains
to disprove such a claim from any other source than the Bible itself.

With that said, we're ignoring the discussion of biblical accuracy today
in order to understand the contents of the Book of Abraham in context.
It's really just a nesting doll of religious fiction as a rewriting of a
religious text.

Chapter one begins with this:

"In the land of the Chaldeans, at the residence of my father, I,
Abraham, saw that it was needful for me to obtain another place of
residence, and finding there was greater happiness and peace and
rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers and the right
whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been
myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who
possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of
righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of
many nations, a prince of peace; and desiring to receive instructions,
and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a high
priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers, it was conferred
upon me from the fathers; it came down from the fathers, from the
beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the
foundations of the earth, to the present time, even the right of the
first born, on the first man, who is Adam, or first father, through the
fathers, unto me.

2\. I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the
appointment of God unto the fathers, concerning the seed.

This is coded language referring to what was known as the Melchizedek
priesthood. That is the right of the fathers given to the first father,
Adam, passed down from one father to the next, unto Abraham. These
labels Abraham claims for himself, prince of peace, father of many
nations, etc., all were ascribed to him long after his supposed death by
the Hebrews. It would be like Einstein calling himself the greatest
physicist who ever lived while he was in his teens, it just doesn't make
sense.

Chapter one continues to describe what the land of Egypt was like
religiously at the time. Archaeologists note Egypt as a paganistic
society but paganism has essentially become a catch-all term for most
mysterious religions which predate monotheism. Abraham says this:

"My fathers having turned from their righteousness, and from the
holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto the
worshipping of the Gods of the heathens, utterly refused to hearken to
my voice; for their hearts were set to do evil, and were wholly turned
to the God of Elkenah, and the God of Libnah, and the God of Mahmackrah,
and the God of Korash, and the God of Pharaoh, King of Egypt;
therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in
offering up their children unto their dumb idols, and hearkened not unto
my voice but endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest
of Elkenah; the priest of Elkenah was also the priest of Pharaoh.

3\. Now, at this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh, the
King of Egypt to offer up upon the altar which was built in the land of
Chaldea, for the offering unto these strange Gods, both men, wo\[m\]en
and children. And it came to pass that the priest made an offering unto
the God of Pharaoh, and also unto the God of Shagreel, even after the
manner of the Egyptians. Now the God of Shagreel was the Sun. Even the
thank-offering of a child did the priest of Pharaoh offer upon the
altar, which stood by the hill called Potiphar's Hill, at the head of
the plain of Olishem."

All of these names don't map to anything Egyptians would have called
their gods and priests. For lack of a better source, these names
necessarily must have been dreamt up in the mind of Joseph Smith. There
are some Greek and Hebrew sounding syllables, but the names Jo put into
Abraham's writing are unrecognizable to sounding like any specific
language. These names are crucial, however, when it comes to Joseph's
'translation' of the papyri. Facsimile 1 is the iconic picture of a
figure lying on a lion table, which Jo called an altar, with a standing
priest holding a knife up to the lying-down figure. There's also a bird
hovering over the head of the figure lying on the altar which is also
explained in the Book of Abraham. This entire scene depicted in the
papyri of facsimile 1 is described in the following passage:

"Now, this priest had offered upon this altar three virgins at one
time, who were the daughters of Onitah, one of the Royal descent,
directly from the loins of Ham. These virgins were offered up because of
their virtue; they would not bow down to worship Gods of wood or
of stone, therefore they were killed upon this altar, and it was done
after the manner of the Egyptians.

4\. And it come to pass that the priests laid violence upon me, that
they might slay me, also, as they did those virgins, upon this altar;
and that you might have a knowledge of this altar, I will refer you to
the representation at the commencement of this record. It was made
after the form of a bedstead, such as was had among the Chaldeans, and
it stood before the gods of Elkenah, Libnah, Mahmackrah, Korash, & also
a God like unto that of Pharaoh King of Egypt. That you may have an
understanding of these Gods, I have given you the fashion of them in the
figures, at the beginning, which manner of the figures is called by the
Chaldeans Rahleenos, which signifies Hyeroglyphics.

5\. And as they lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer me
up, and take away my life, behold, I lifted up my voice unto the Lord my
God; and the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me with a vision of
the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately
unloosed my bands, and his voice was unto me. Abram! Abram! behold, my
name is JEHOVAH, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver
thee, and to take thee away from thy fathers house, and from all thy
kin-folks, into a strange land, which thou knowest not of,"

We just need to pause for a brief moment here. Human sacrifice in Egypt
is hard to document. That's not to say it didn't happen, but merely that
it's hard to prove the circumstances by which it was performed. By the
logic, or lack thereof, provided in the Book of Abraham, Abraham removed
himself unto Egypt and consequently suffered some level of religious
persecution which led to him being a sacrificial lamb on the altar
shaped like a lion. However, modern Egyptology can only really document
two types of human sacrifice and they seem rather rare in occurrence.

"Human sacrifice is not generally connected with ancient Egypt. There is
little evidence of human sacrifice during most of the dynastic period of
ancient Egypt\... but there is some evidence that it may have been
practiced in the Nile Valley during the [1st
Dynasty](http://www.touregypt.net/hdyn1.htm) and possibly
also [Predynastic](http://www.touregypt.net/ebph5.htm) Egypt.

The earliest known example of human sacrifice may perhaps be found in
Predynastic burials in the south of Egypt, dated to the Naqada II
Period. One of the discovered bodies showed marks of the throat from
having been cut before having been decapitated.

The two definitions of human sacrifice that could be applied to the very
early development of ancient Egypt are:

The ritual killing of human beings as part of the offerings presented to
the gods on a regular basis, or on special occasions.

Retainer sacrifice, or the killing of domestic servants to bury them
along with their master.

\-- Human Sacrifice, Jacques Kinnaer"

Then the book goes on to discuss how the foundation of Egypt was
established as such an idolatrous paganistic culture of hedonism, turns
out it's because of racism.

"Now this King of Egypt was a descendant from the loins of Ham, and was
a partaker of the blood of the Canaanites, by birth. From this descent
sprang all the Egyptians, and thus the blood of the Canaanites was
preserved in the land.

7\. The land of Egypt being first discovered by a woman, who was the
daughter of Ham, and the daughter of Egyptus, which, in the Chaldea,
signifies Egypt, which signifies, that which is forbidden. When this
woman discovered the land it was under water, who afterwards settled her
sons in it: And thus, from Ham, sprang that race which preserved the
curse in the land....

Pharaoh, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged
his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate
that order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the
days of the first Patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also
Noah, his father, who blessed him with the blessings of the earth, and
with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the
Priesthood.

8\. Now Pharaoh being of that lineage, by which he could not have the
right of Priesthood,"

What, one may ask, was the curse that caused Pharaoh to not be able to
hold the priesthood, and all the subsequent generations of descendants
of Ham to have this same ban? Well, the Book of Mormon is nice enough to
articulate it for us in extensive detail.

Alma 3:

"6 And the skins of the Lamanites were dark, according to the mark which
was set upon their fathers, which was a curse upon them because of their
transgression and their rebellion against their brethren, who consisted
of Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph, and Sam, who were just and holy men.

7 And their brethren sought to destroy them, therefore they were cursed;
and the Lord God set a mark upon them, yea, upon Laman and Lemuel, and
also the sons of Ishmael, and Ishmaelitish women.

8 And this was done that their seed might be distinguished from the seed
of their brethren, that thereby the Lord God might preserve his people,
that they might not mix and believe in incorrect traditions which would
prove their destruction.

9 And it came to pass that whosoever did mingle his seed with that of
the Lamanites did bring the same curse upon his seed.

10 Therefore, whosoever suffered himself to be led away by the Lamanites
was called under that head, and there was a mark set upon him...

13 Now we will return again to the Amlicites, for they also had
a mark set upon them; yea, they set the mark upon themselves, yea, even
a mark of red upon their foreheads.

14 Thus the word of God is fulfilled, for these are the words which he
said to Nephi: Behold, the Lamanites have I cursed, and I will set a
mark on them that they and their seed may be separated from thee and thy
seed, from this time henceforth and forever, except they repent of their
wickedness and turn to me that I may have mercy upon them.

15 And again: I will set a mark upon him that mingleth his seed with thy
brethren, that they may be cursed also.

16 And again: I will set a mark upon him that fighteth against thee and
thy seed."

That was Joseph's theology coming out of 1829 when the BoM was written.
His theology evolved and developed throughout early 1830 as he began his
bible revision, which began publishing in 1832 with the Book of Moses,
which was also canonized into the Pearl of Great Price with these
passages.

"the people of Canaan shall divide themselves in the land and the land
shall be barren and unfruitfull and none other people shall dwell there
but the people of Canaan for behold the Lord shall curse the land with
much heat and the barrenness thereof shall go fourth \<​forth​\> forever
and there was a blackness come upon all the Children of Canaan that they
were dispised among all people...

Noah awoke from his wine and k\[n\]ew what his younger son had done unto
him, and he said cursed be Canaan a Servent of servents shall he be unto
his breatheren and he said blessed be the Lord God of Shem and Canaan
shall be his servent and a vail of darkness shall cover him that he
shall be known among all men God shall enlarge Japheth and he
shall dwell in the tents of Shem and Canaan shall be his serven\[t\]"

People will often claim that Joseph was progressive considering he
ordained a black man, Elijah Able, into the priesthood. It was Brigham
Young who applied the curse of Cain to black people and barred them from
getting the priesthood. Well, Joseph, like everybody in all the history
of humanity, was a product of his time and culture. By the way, by
contemporary accounts, Elijah Able was a rather white and delightsome
African-American. The simple fact that Jo ordained someone his
generation would call a 'mulatto' to the priesthood may be evidence of
his profoundly racist ideas of righteousness being tied to skin color
than it is a testament to his progressiveness. Just a different
perspective worth consideration, that's all. It should also be noted
that Jo mislabeled one of the dark-skinned priests in Facsimile 3 to be
a slave, seemingly reminiscent of his own views of People of Color's
role in early 19^th^-century American society.

The purposes of our examination of the Book of Abraham on the spiritual
front today are to see what doctrine and theology was specifically
derived from it, and we're not even through the first half of the first
chapter. The spiritual side of the BoA is much deeper than could be
stated in this format. Let us continue our examination by moving into
chapter 2. One last point of consideration before moving on, the
introduction of the original 1842 printing of the BoA included facsimile
1, which I described as Abraham lying on a table to be sacrificed to the
idolatrous priest Elkenah. Not only was this papyrus inaccurately
interpolated by Joseph Smith when he pasted it to a thick piece of paper
and drew his sketch of what he thought the papyrus should look like if
it were complete, but it was also used to translate the contents of, at
least, the first chapter of the BoA. The reading we've done describes
and contextualizes Facsimile 1 and the original printing contained
"Explanation of the Above Cut" with a translation of the image with all
the names listed. It simply cannot be proven that the Book of Abraham
was not 'translated' from Facsimile 1.

Chapter 2 contains this heading in the modern-day Book of Abraham from
LDS.org

"Abraham leaves Ur to go to Canaan---Jehovah appears to him at
Haran---All gospel blessings are promised to his seed and through his
seed to all---He goes to Canaan and on to Egypt."

This chapter goes on to describe Abraham taking Sarai to wife, and his
brother, Nahor, taking Milcah to wife. Abraham, along with his nephew,
Lot, and all their wives went from Ur of the Chaldees to Canaan. After
that, Jehovah once again appears to Abraham and tells him that he and
his family will depart Haran. Jehovah talks about how awesome he is
knowing the end from the beginning, and the Earth is his footstool, etc.
After Jehovah departs from Abraham, he says that he knows that God is
super for real this time because he appeared face-to-face with Abraham
and also saved him from being slain in Egypt by the idolatrous priest
Elkenah. After that, Abraham and his family and newly acquired followers
went from Haran to Jershon, to the land of Sechem, to Moreh, and finally
to Canaan before deciding to go back to Egypt because the famine was too
great. Abraham built multiple altars all along the way and had a few
more visionary experiences with the Lord, during one of which, the Lord
tells Abraham that Sarai was too beautiful to go into Egypt as his wife,
and that he should tell everybody that she is his sister or else the
Egyptians would kill him and steal her away. Not really sure how that
works logistically, maybe they would vie for Abraham's favor if they
thought Sarai was his sister he could give away in marriage instead of
having her for himself to be stolen by the idolatrous Egyptians, but I'm
not exactly sure how to interpret it.

Chapter 3 gets pretty fun and it's very crucial to deeper Mormon
doctrine. This is truly one of the pearls in this book for everything
contained therein. It begins with Abraham possessing the Urim and
Thummim. It should be noted before proceeding that Jo and friends used
the phrase Urim and Thummim in ways ancient Hebrews never did. The
Hebrew priests used these stones, where Urim and Thummim translate to
Light and perfection, to basically divine the future by casting them,
whichever way they landed designated specific outcomes. Jo and friends
used the term Urim and Thummim as a catch-all phrase for any seer stone
used in the capacity of scrying. Jo putting Precious in Mr. Hat and
staring into the darkness was how he used the Urim and Thummim and it
could be reasonably assumed that this is the way Jo interpreted Abraham
using the same implements, not in the way Hebrew priests actually used
such stones.

"16. And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had
given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars also that they
were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of
God; and there were many great ones, which were near unto it; and the
Lord said unto me, these are the governing ones; and the name of the
great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me: for I am the Lord thy
God, I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same
order of that upon which thou standest. And the Lord said unto me, by
the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the
Lord, according to its times and seasons in the Revolutions thereof,
that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of
reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed
unto that whereon thou standest; this is the reckoning of the Lord's
time, according to the reckoning of Kolob."

This passage has caused some confusion as well as generated some
interesting apologetics and analysis. Essentially, the greatest star
nearest the throne of God is Kolob. As early as 1913, an article
appeared attempting to pinpoint in the night sky where this throne might
be. In an article contained in a 1913 edition of The Improvement Era,
titled "Joseph Smith, Jr., as a Translator," written by Robert C. Webb,
he articulated what Kolob could mean and where it might point.

"The explanation given in connection with this figure is that it
indicates \"Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the
Celestial.\" The form of this word would seem to suggest a Tamitic
etymology, akin, perhaps, to the Hebrew word KALAB, a dog; whence,
possibly, Sirius, the Dog-star, so called. According to the further
explanation, it gives light to the sun and other bodies, through the
medium of 2 2 and 2 3, which are called, collectively, Hah- ko-kau-beam.
This curious word is also Hebrew, although judging from the spelling,
the pronunciation is ex- pressed, rather than the direct trans-
literation. It is the Hebrew, KOKOB, a star, KOKOBIM, stars; the
syllable HAH, representing the definite article, whence, \"the stars.\"

The justification for labeling Kolob as the Sirius star has Hebrew
roots. In an article published by the Rothberg International School,
Hebrew University, titled Ain't Nothing but a Hound Dog, it goes through
the Semitic root of Kolob, or, because Hebrew doesn't have any vowels,
klb. I think you're going to like this.

"Keleb *in Deuteronomy* 23:19

The central locus of the discussion concerning the possibility that the
word klb may refer to something other than a canine is in Deut 23:19

'You shall not bring the fee of a whore or the pay of a keleb into the
house of the LORD in fulfillment of any vow, for both are abhorrent to
the Lord your God.'

The ancient commentaries and translations understood the Hebrew word
keleb in its common meaning of "dog." This remained the standard
interpretation until the modern period. Since the nineteenth century,
many biblical scholars have proposed that the term klb be understood
here as referring to a male prostitute."

So, let me just set the record straight here, to modern Hebrew scholars,
one interpretation of this Book of Abraham passage would say that god
and his harem of wives live on the planet nearest the star, man-whore.
I'll just let that sink in.

The second part of that passage talks about how days on Kolob are
reconciled with days on earth. According to the Book of Abraham, one
thousand years on earth is a single day on Kolob, which hearkens to a
passage in genesis articulating roughly the same concept. The passage
following that articulates even deeper the concept of how larger planets
have longer days than smaller planets in their respective revolutions.

"17. And the Lord said unto me, the planet, which is the lesser light,
lesser than that which is to rule the day, even the night, is above, or
greater than that upon which thou standest, in point of reckoning, for
it moveth in order more slow: this is in order, because it standeth
above the earth upon which thou standest, therefore, the reckoning of
its time is not so many as to its number of days, and of months, and of
years. And the Lord said unto me, now, Abraham, these two facts exist,
behold thine eyes seeth it; it is given unto thee to know the times of
reckoning, and the set times, yea the set time of the earth upon which
thou standest, and the set time of the greater light, which is set to
rule the day, and the set time of the lesser light, which is set to rule
the night.

18\. Now the set time of the lesser light, is a longer time as to its
reckoning, than the reckoning of the time of the earth upon which thou
standest; and where these two facts exist, there shall be another fact
above them, that is, there shall be another planet whose reckoning of
time shall be longer still; and thus there shall be the reckoning of the
time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which
Kolob, is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which, Kolob, is set
nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to
the same order of that upon which thou standest. And it is given unto
thee, to know the set time of all the stars, that are set to give light,
until thou come near unto the throne of God."

Had the Book of Abraham been truly written by Abraham, this would be a
monumental piece of Mormon and Christian prophecy if we're extremely
generous with the interpretation. Essentially, this was the astrological
interpretation of Kepler's law of planetary motion. Bigger planets
further from a star revolve and move slower than planets closer to a
star. This was a messy way of saying it and the passage could be
interpreted multiple ways, but that's what I take from it. Now, if this
was indeed written 3500 years before Kepler was alive, as the Book of
Abraham claims to be, this would be a monumental piece of prophetic
scripture. But, if we consider a number of markers in Jo's life, not
least of which is the fact that he died with a Jupiter talisman on his
person, we can see his affinity towards astrology and this passage falls
into the realm of astrological nonsense which means a lot to those
reading it who know the interpretation of all the words, but to outside
readers like us seems like brain vomit from Joseph Smith.

Using the stars to divine the nature of God, gods, or the direction of
the universe has been a widely practiced endeavor throughout many human
cultures. Astrology was one of Jo's many fascinations and it is tied
directly with many of the occult ceremonies and practices which Jo held
a certain predilection for. Speculative Masons were often steeped in
astrology and many of the early astronomers were themselves Masons.
Alchemy was another of these schools of thought being passed around
Masonic lodges. Astrology has often been called the daughter of
astronomy, and likewise alchemy could be called the daughter of
chemistry. These are the speculative and conjectural nonsense fields of
pseudo-science which were often accompanied by the much harder
descriptive and operative sciences, many of which were passed from
generation to generation in Masonic lodges. Jo's affinity for Christian
astrology was likely honed upon his official induction into Masonry, and
the years he'd spent cultivating this playground inside his own mind
were likely shaped by his associates who practiced the occult, alchemy,
astrology, and had garnered that intelligence from Masons while in
lodge. Yet one more piece to the Masonry and Mormonism puzzle which
exhibit just how inextricably tied they are.

To wrap this back into the astrology in the Book of Abraham; this book
was written and published post-Copernicus, Kepler, and Newton. The
so-called revelations in the Book of Abraham of planetary motion, often
used in apologetic ways, speaks nothing to the actual astronomy which
had developed long before the birth of Joseph Smith, and merely offers
platitudinous astrology which Agrippa rightly labeled as nothing more
than entertainment when he wrote this around 1530 in *The Vanity of Arts
and Sciences*:

"Yet these Fortune-tellers \[astrologers\] do finde entertainment among
Princes and Magistrates, from whom they receive considerable salaries;
whereas there is indeed no sort or generation of men more pernicious to
a Commonwealth, than those that undertake to prognosticate by the Stars,
by Dreams, or any other Artifices of Divination, and scatter the
Prophesies about..."

Wise words speaking from the grave nearly half a millennium ago.
Astrology and alchemy paid the bills because it was the quackery that
sold books, while astronomy and chemistry were doing the real work
behind the scenes. I'm sure we can see analogs of this same idea
permeating our culture today. It's somewhat heartening to know that
selling fake news has always paid better than selling facts; it's not
just a recent trend.

Chapter 3 finishes with God, Jehovah, showing more visions to Abraham
with the following passage:

"19 And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are
two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be
another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more
intelligent than they all.

20 The Lord thy God sent his angel to deliver thee from the hands of the
priest of Elkenah.

21 I dwell in the midst of them all; I now, therefore, have come down
unto thee to declare unto thee the works which my hands have made,
wherein my wisdom excelleth them all, for I rule in the heavens above,
and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over all the
intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning; I came down in
the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences thou hast seen.

22 Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were
organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of
the noble and great ones;

23 And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the
midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood
among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he
said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before
thou wast born.

24 And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said
unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there,
and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon
these may dwell;

25 And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things
whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

26 And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they
who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom
with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their
second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and
ever."

This is the introduction of the first and second estate doctrine. The
idea of the angels who kept versus relinquished their first estate is in
the New Testament, Jude, chapter 1 vs 5-6:

"I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how
that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not.

And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto
the judgment of the great day."

One way to understand this estate doctrine is by using the term
existence. Mormon doctrine teaches that we're all infinite spirits who
are granted the first estate in the premortal existence. Those who
abandoned that premortal first estate left with 1-3^rd^ the hosts of
heaven and went down to outer darkness with Lucifer. Those who retain
their first estate are granted their second estate when they are born on
Earth, mortal existence is the second estate; or a spirit receives their
second estate upon receiving their physical body and all the
opportunities for experience and development mortality affords. This
second-estate doctrine is specific to Mormonism alone and it's only
provided in the Book of Abraham.

After the introduction of the second estate, the Book of Abraham pays a
very brief homage to a doctrinal treatise captured in the Book of Moses,
also part of the Pearl of Great Price. This theological claim states
that Jesus and Lucifer are the literal sons of Elohim and both proposed
a plan to God. Jesus' plan was that of free and independent agency among
the embodied spirit children of God. Lucifer's plan, however, offered no
agency, but merely made us all robots to execute the will of the father,
making us all essentially robots, but there wouldn't be any death or
sickness, pain or suffering on earth, and all the spirits would return
to the presence of God after the bodily death. No judgement, no
separation of kingdoms, nothing bad ever happening, we'd all just be
Adams and Eves in an eternal garden of Eden in Jackson County, Missouri.
God chose Jesus' plan and Lucifer was so upset with the decision that he
departed heaven, bound for outer darkness, which is when a third of the
hosts of heaven departed with Lucifer.

The passage is as follows:

"23. And the Lord said, who shall I send? And one answered like unto
the Son of Man, here am I, send me. And another answered and said, here
am I, send me. And the Lord said, I will send the first. And the second
was angry, and kept not his first estate, and, at that day, many
followed after him."

There's an interesting shift from chapter 3 to chapters 4 and 5.
Everything in the Book of Abraham so far has been Abraham interacting
with the world around him and with the Lord his God. Singular, Lord,
God. Chapters 4 and 5, however, recount one of the Genesis creation
narratives, but with every entry of God replaced with Gods. This is
interesting for a few reasons. It wouldn't be until the King Follet
discourse that Joseph publicly preached on the infinite regress of gods
and the nature of Elohim god, but it was back in Liberty Jail in 1839
when he first used the word gods instead of god to describe his personal
notion of his personal creator. One of his letters to the saints during
their exodus to Illinois said gods instead of God which stands out
prominently when compared to every other public sermon Joseph ever gave.

One possible reasoning through which to interpret this shift in Liberty
Jail could be due to Joseph Smith's own self-reflection while locked up
with nothing to do other than think. God had forsaken his
prophet-servant and all the thousands of Mormons in their time of need.
He'd given prophecy after prophecy that the Mormons would conquer their
enemies and that he would be a Mahomet of this generation, yet there he
was, locked in jail while the Mormons suffered in sickness and death
during the winter exodus to their next promised land. I think Jo felt
abandoned by his god and was forced to truly ponder the existence of god
in ways he'd never done before. Thus, the first invocation of gods
instead of God. That's how I view it, but I don't really have any other
marker or evidence other than the actual timing and language to
substantiate it beyond a reasonable doubt.

And really, would that be surprising? A lot of people who believe in God
ponder why bad things happen to them when they're at rock bottom. Why
would god let this happen to me? Of course, in Jo's case, why would god
let these terrible things happen to his chosen saints and his servant?

Modern D&C 121 is one of Joseph's letters to the saints in Quincy from
Liberty Jail and it starts with:

"O God! Where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy
hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed and thine eye, yea thy
pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens, the wrongs of thy people, and
of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O
Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions,
before thine heart shall be softened towards them, and thy bowels be
moved with compassion towards them?..

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be
one God or many Gods, they shall be manifest; All thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who
have endured valiantly for the Gospel of Jesus Christ"

The Book of Abraham is essentially a revision of the Genesis narrative
with God replaced by Gods, and it happened 3 years after this Liberty
Jail letter, when it seems like Jo was at rock bottom and having some
kind of major existential crisis. He'd come a long way since then. He'd
gotten back up after falling down and now, in Nauvoo, he had a whole new
metropolis built as a monolith to the unwavering fealty the Saints had
sworn to their prophet.

Let's read a snapshot of the Book of Abraham compared to the Genesis
creation myth.

Genesis 1:

1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

2 And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the
face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters.

3 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

4 And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light
from the darkness.

5 And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And
the evening and the morning were the first day."

Abraham 4:1

"And then the Lord said, let us go down; and they went down at the
beginning, and they organized and formed, (that is, the Gods,) the
heavens and the earth. And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and
desolate; because they had not formed anything but the earth: and
darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the spirit of the Gods
was brooding upon the faces of the water.

24\. And they said, the Gods, let there be light, and there was light.
And they, the Gods, comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they
divided the light, or caused it to be divided from the darkness, and the
Gods called the light day, and the darkness they called night."

And it continues like that for 2 chapters, rewriting the entire Genesis
narrative. It is interesting to note, the Book of Abraham ends with Eve
being made from Adam's rib and Adam naming all the creatures gods gave
him dominion over. This leads one to believe it was a work in progress
and would be furthered at a later time.

At the beginning of this section in the Book, it constructs Facsimile 2
with the translation of its meaning below. Facsimile 2 is the circular
sigil known to Egyptologists as a hypocephalus. This is the funerary
permit for Horus-Re to be allowed into the afterlife, but Joseph applied
it to the passages in the Book of Abraham rewriting of the Genesis
creation narrative.

Jo claimed the hypocephalus depicted the following items:

1.  Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or
    the residence of God.

2.  Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, which is the
    next grand governing creations, near to the celestial or the place
    where God resides

3.  Is made to represent God sitting upon his throne, clothed with power
    and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his head;
    representing, also, the grand Key words of the Holy Priesthood, as
    revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden,...

4.  Answers to the Hebrew word Raukeeyang, signifying expanse, or the
    firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure, in Egyptian,
    signifying one thousand; answering to the measuring of the time of
    Oliblish, which is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its
    measuring of time.

It continues on until it terminates with Figures 8-21 claiming they'll
be revealed at a later date. The reason this is relevant is due to the
placing of its printing and the text of the Book of Abraham which
follows. The rewritten creation myth is based on this facsimile and
Abraham teaching Pharaoh about astronomy is based on Facsimile 3, and
we'll discuss these in depth next episode. Due to the simple fact that
these facsimiles were printed where they were and were 'translated'
according to Jo's translation method with the explanations which
reflects the content in the Book of Abraham, this utterly eviscerates
any claim that the Book of Abraham text was based on something other
than the facsimiles. We'll discuss the apologist and Egyptologist claims
next week, but it is just important to note this crucial fact as we wrap
up discussion of the content of the Book of Abraham today. These
facsimiles served to be the inspiration for the content in the Book of
Abraham, and we needn't appeal to the missing portion of the papyri
collection to surmise where else the content could have come from.

The factual claims against the Book of Abraham say nothing of its impact
on Mormon doctrine and theology. Without the Book of Abraham, we don't
have Kolob, or man-whore by modern Hebrew scholarship, we don't have the
first and second estate doctrine, we don't have gods being the creators
of earth, we don't have the sacrificial narrative of Abraham by the
Egyptian idolatrous priest, we don't have god descending in the form of
a great bird to rescue Abraham from his sacrificial predicament, we
don't have the temple ceremony passion narrative of God commanding
Jehovah to go down and create earth in the 7-day period, nor do we have
our spirits being called 'intelligences' that are organized in the first
estate before we're physically born into our second estate, and, we
don't have the further retrenchment of the teaching that dark skin is
the mark of the curse of Cain, and white skin is associated with
righteousness. The Book of Abraham is so crucial to deep Mormon theology
that to abandon it would excise so many beliefs that it would render
Mormon doctrine fundamentally different. Even the study guide I found on
the LDS.org teaching manuals site spent the first 15 paragraphs
defending the authenticity of the papyri and the 'translation' method Jo
used to bring the Book of Abraham into existence. The fact of the matter
is, Jo's theology mutated in extreme ways during the Nauvoo period, and
the Book of Abraham is yet one more marker of that evolution. When we
start plucking some of Jo's teachings out of modern-day Mormonism, one
wonders where we should stop removing pieces and patching over them.
Should the church do something more than 'disavow' old racist teachings?
Should they say the Book of Abraham was a creation solely of Joseph
Smith and not actually written in the hand of Abraham as Jo claimed?
Should the church abandon the idea of Kolob and god being a human being
who was once mortal just like we are today? If we pluck out too many of
these pieces, Jo ceases to be the prophet the Church claims him to be
today. If the Church can disavow or abandon some of Jo's teachings, why
not more of them.... Why not all of them? Why even need Joseph Smith for
anything other than the demonstrably fallacious Book of Mormon?

The Church is trapped. They can't get rid of any of the Book of Abraham
without getting rid of major pieces which set Mormonism apart from all
other mainstream Protestant Christian sects. Now they're in a sunk cost
fallacy with these doctrines, seemingly hoping that one day it will all
make sense and people will stop abandoning the Church because of its
false claims and teachings. One day, if they just withstand the bleeding
for long enough, Jesus will return and every piece of Mormon scripture
and doctrine will make sense to everybody in the world. The rapture will
happen, Mormonism will finally be proven to be the one true religion, if
they can just stand up to or wholly ignore criticisms from the outside
world filled with Natural Men who are enemies to God and have been from
the fall of Adam.

I'm of the opinion that a major reformation needs to happen in the
Church, and it needs to be top-down. Any bottom-up reformation will
become a schism and breakoff faction, this needs to be a top-down
restructuring of doctrine, theology, practices, and membership
requirements. The Church needs to rip off this bandaid already so it can
properly clean and dress the wounds and heal without the infection
plaguing the next patchwork bandage put in place. I don't reasonably see
this happening any time in the future, this is a pipe-dream. But every
day they stick to their guns is another disaffected member, another
person hurt by institutionalized racism, and another family who finally
says they're done with the church and sends in their resignation
letters. Every day that passes without fundamental issues being
addressed and immoral doctrines being exorcised and apologized for, is
another tithing envelope left empty. This train-wreck may be fun to
watch fantasizing about how it ends, but the damage and pain this wreck
is causing every day is objectively immoral and disgusting when we see
our fellow human beings suffer through it every single day, regardless
of their beliefs.

Maybe it would be best to advocate for understanding and sympathy. The
Church and its leadership are stuck between a rock and a hard place when
it comes to the majority of doctrinal issues. Members are stuck with
either consuming anti-Mormon literature and abandoning their exaltation
and eternal glory, or just burying their head in the sand and
acknowledging that there may be problems, but the Church is so good and
helps so many people. ExMormons are stuck with friends and family
members believing in a racist, misogynistic, and damaging cult but they
can't talk to their friends and family about it because it just causes
fights. This religion is a dividing force amidst an already divided
species of animals we call human beings. This religion shoves a wedge
between people in all sorts of relationships and causes more heartbreak
and depression than it can offer through meaningless platitudes about
what happens when we die. This religion take money from the poor and
funds billion-dollar for-profit business endeavors, while people all
over the world thirst and starve to death and never get treated for
common illnesses. This religion is a malignant parasite and it impacts
everybody differently on a personal level, yet causes the same anger and
pain for so many people in and out of it. Everybody is a victim of this
religion, even those at the very top who have no easy way out of these
very problematic issues without losing face. The leadership doesn't want
to feel like they've misled people and the members don't want to feel
like they've been misled, but the Church's doctrines, theology, and
scripture are leading EVERYBODY astray and causing people to lose sight
of truly important issues facing humanity. The institution needs to
humble itself and reform, or the hemorrhaging will only get worse as
access to information world-wide increases.

Keep an eye out to watch the slow and morbid collapse of Talos at some
indeterminable point in our future.

Lesley interview:

Lesley Butterfield is a Registered Nurse and survivor advocate who works
with victims of abuse across a variety of settings. She's helped
contribute to coverage surrounding abuse in several news and media
outlets including, Buzzfeed, Good4Utah, The Salt Lake Tribune, The New
Yorker, and Voxx. She has also appeared as a guest on Mormon Happy Hour
and Rational Faith\'s podcasts, speaking on women\'s issues, spiritual
abuse, and the cultural mechanisms which enable abuse within the Mormon
context. Recently, her Op-Ed, entitled, \"Open Letter to the LDS
Patriarchy,\" was published in the Salt Lake Tribune, which garnered
national attention. She's also spoken to the state legislature as part
of her advocacy efforts. 

She serves on her local Special Education Advisory Committee and is a
member of The Attachment and Trauma Network, The National Organization
of Victim Assistance, Break The Silence, National Alliance on Mental
Illness, Mental Health America, and American Alliance of University
Women.

She is the creator
of [UnrighteousDominion.org](https://contactmonkey.com/api/v1/tracker?cm_session=7492bf28-585f-4dbc-9391-7fb0a0592014&cm_type=link&cm_link=54ccaa89-e067-499c-b189-1e77d80d0928&cm_destination=http://UnrighteousDominion.org),
which is a platform for survivors of spiritual abuse with the Mormon
church to safely and anonymously share their stories.

**Lesley, welcome and thank you so much for joining us!**

I want to start with a quick question, and it may possibly be the most
important question of our conversation, with all the advocacy and
networking you do, how do you find time to eat or sleep?

First off, I want us to level the playing field for the purposes of this
conversation. Let's all work with the same definition of spiritual abuse
within the LDS Church. Can you define that for us?

How does emotional and mental abuse manifest itself within the Church
and, quite frankly, in many faith traditions?

It seems as if this abusive system is baked into the religion itself.
When spiritual exaltation and reaching the celestial kingdom is always
the end goal, a lot of mechanisms can be subconsciously employed by the
religion itself to coerce the members into abusing each other or
themselves. How much do you think this abuse is simply a product of a
religious structure, and can a religion exist without some level of
abuse like this?

As someone who's been working in this field for years now and has
contributed so much to the conversation, do you have some pointers for
us to help us start conversations about abuse within the Church and
other faith traditions when the opportunity may arise?

> Dovetailing off the last question, what are some common mistakes
> people make when trying to talk about these crucial, yet often
> polarizing, issues?

I want to broach the McKenna Denson subject as it's an ongoing lawsuit
the Church and Denson are currently amidst. From everything coming out
of the Denson case, what are your takeaways from the situation and what
do you think her case has revealed about the Church and the way it
treats issues of abuse?

Personal story conversation for patrons

Lesley, I want to thank you for joining us for this important subject
that affects so many people. I want to give you a chance to talk about
unrighteous dominion and any other projects you're currently working on.
Can you tell us about that and also let people know where they can find
your online presence?

Any concluding thoughts you'd like to leave us with in light of our
discussion?

Lesley Butterfield, thank you again for joining us.
