---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 115 - Bennett, Jo’s Kindred Scoundrel

episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-115-bennett-jos-kindred-scoundrel/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-115-bennett-jos-kindred-scoundrel
libsyn_embed: 6909415
category: History
date: 2018-08-09 22:27:47 PDT
redirect_from: /2018/08/10/ep-115-bennett-jos-kindred-scoundrel/
---

This episode has a patreon only segment for the last 20 mins
\~1:38-1:56. No need to edit after the listener mail and signoff are
recorded.

49dollarsites.com

Bennett Fullmer

Ep 115 – Bennett, Jo’s Kindred Scoundrel

On this episode, we begin with discussing the rumor mill that was
Nauvoo. The Relief Society, with Emma as head, was tasked with tracking
down the source of salacious rumors concerning adultery within the
Mormon elite and squashing said rumors. John C. Wreck-it Bennett becomes
too brazen with his propositions of polygamous relationships and must be
excised from Church leadership. We begin to see the fracturing of the
relationship between Jo and Bennett unfold.

Links:

Mormon Enigma by Newell and Avery  
<https://www.amazon.com/Mormon-Enigma-Emma-Hale-Smith/dp/0252062914>

Bennett’s brothel in Nauvoo  
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/John_C._Bennett/Brothel_at_Nauvoo>

Bennett, the ‘Lucifer’ of early Mormonism  
<http://www.ldsliving.com/John-C-Bennett-the-Lucifer-of-early-Mormonism/s/65856>

JosephSmithsPolygamy on Bennett  
<http://josephsmithspolygamy.org/john-c-bennett-and-spiritual-wifery/>

Rise and Fall of Bennett  
<http://www.lostmormonism.com/infamous-mormon-john-c-bennett/>

John Bennett and Joseph Smith’s Polygamy: Addressing the Question of
Reliability  
<http://mormonpolygamydocuments.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Hales-John-C.-Bennett.pdf>

Bennett, Saintly Scoundrel  
<http://www.salamandersociety.com/museum/bennett/>

Witch ointments and aphrodisiacs by J. Muller  
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10024767>

Bennett’s alleged abortions in Nauvoo  
<http://mormonpolygamydocuments.org/abortions/#_ftn3>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Add this in somewhere. Talk about Sam Young and best tool we have is to
use the chat window.

**Hi Bryce,**

Thank you for your interest in chatting with a member of the Church.
What would you like to talk about?  
  
A representative will join the chat once you send a message.

**Bryce**

11:18 PM

Hello, I just have a few questions about common practices within the
Church.

Now chatting with: Erina and Kelly

**Erina**

11:18 PM

Hi Bryce\! This is Erina and Kelly from mormon.org.

**Erina**

11:18 PM

What is your question? :)

**Bryce**

11:19 PM

Nice to meet you\! What are worthiness interviews? I see videos on
facebook of a hunger strike and was hoping to get more information.

**Erina**

11:20 PM

Oh cool :) Is that Mormon movie??

**Bryce**

11:22 PM

I don't think so. This guy Sam Young is holding a hunger strike near
temple square. The movement is called Protect LDS Children. Protect the
children from what? What is going on with the worthiness interviews that
children would need protection from?

Now chatting with: Anggely and Hyun

**Anggely**

11:23 PM

We are not sure about these news. We are full-time missionaries for the
church so we do not watch any news or tv during this time

**Anggely**

11:25 PM

But we do have access to church newsroom that has a clear statement from
the church about youth interviews

**Bryce**

11:26 PM

I'm aware of the press release, but I also understand that one-on-one
Bishop's interviews still happen behind closed doors. Is that true?

**Hyun**

11:26 PM

https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/article/new-guidelines-for-interviewing-youth

**Anggely**

11:27 PM

We are not sure. Like I said we are full-time missionaries for the
church. :) But the link we have provided should give you clear
statements from church headquarters 

**Anggely**

11:28 PM

Also the church has released the following:

**Bryce**

11:28 PM

Were you interviewed one-on-one behind closed doors with a bishop before
your mission?

**Hyun**

11:28 PM

So from the article we sent you, it says 

  - > "If a youth desires, he or she may invite a parent or another
    > adult to be present when meeting with the bishop or one of his
    > counselors."

**Anggely**

11:29 PM

To go on a mission you have to be 18 or older. I was 21 so we meet with
our leaders to prepare for our missions 

**Bryce**

11:32 PM

So you, as a 21-year-old woman, met with a bishop alone, behind closed
doors?

**Anggely**

11:32 PM

Who is a bishop to you?

**Bryce**

11:35 PM

I don't have a bishop because I don't go to Church, I just find the
practice to be appalling given the possibility for something bad to
happen and the liability if it does. Did you meet with a bishop
one-on-one before you left for your mission?

**Hyun**

11:36 PM

Are you a member of the church? In this church, all of members, each
individuals, have the opportunities to sustain leaders and we support
them and they also have sacred responsibility to care for all the
members.

**Anggely**

11:38 PM

I have been in many different wards and I have really grown to love and
care for all my bishops and leaders of the church. 

**Bryce**

11:40 PM

That's great to hear, I'm glad you find joy in the Gospel. But did you
go through a worthiness interview before you could go on your mission?

**Anggely**

11:41 PM

Our bishops help us prepare for our mission. Sorry, can we ask what is
your purpose for coming on this chat?

**Bryce**

11:45 PM

Only to ask about worthiness interviews. Frankly, if one-one-one
closed-door interviews happen in the church, I'd be terrified bringing
my kids to the Mormon church.

**Anggely**

11:28 PM

We are really sorry that you feel that way. We don't want anyone to feel
that way either. It is odd to me personally that this is such an issue
because many children/ young adults meet with other adults privately in
other settings such as school, counselors, sports and parents trust them
as well. 

**Anggely**

11:49 PM

We encourage you to attend one of our church meetings and meet a bishop
in person :) I think your perception will change 

**Bryce**

11:49 PM

I don't really see how that's the same as a middle-aged man meeting with
teenage girls and asking them about sex behind closed doors. Would you
agree that's not the same things as adults meeting one-on-one?

**Anggely**

11:50 PM

Huh? That is not at all what interviews are about. 

**Bryce**

11:51 PM

Does a bishop ask about "chastity"? one-on-one behind closed doors with
teenagers?

**Hyun**

11:52 PM

This is exactly copied from the first presidency statement regarding the
youth interviews. "Bishops have a sacred responsibility to lead, teach,
and inspire youth. Effective personal  
interviews are one important way they do this. These interviews provide
opportunities to help  
youth become disciples of the Savior, repent of transgressions, and live
the gospel of Jesus Christ."

**Bryce**

11:52 PM

Is "the law of chastity" asked about in these interviews?

**Hyun**

11:52 PM

this is the
reference. https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/multimedia/file/guidelines-interviewing-youth-2018.pdf

**Bryce**

11:58 PM

From heading "Matters for Discussion"  
  
"When discussing obedience to the commandments, the bishop and his
counselors make appropriate used of the limited-use temple recommend
interview questions and the standards and explanations if 'For Strength
of Youth'.  
  
What kind of questions are asked concerning the 'Sexual Purity' section
in 'For Strength of Youth'?

**Anggely**

11:58 PM

The exact questions asked in the interview are listed in the article we
sent :) 

**Hyun**

11:59 PM

"key matters for discussion include the growth of the young person’s
testimony of Heavenly Father, the mission and Atonement of Jesus Christ,
and the restored gospel. The bishop and his counselors emphasize the
importance of keeping baptismal covenants. They teach youth to prepare
to make and keep temple covenants through daily righteous living."

**Anggely**

11:59 PM

We have to get going now Bryce because our shift is over. But we
encourage you to meet the local bishop in your area. They are not
randomly selected but I know that they have been carefully selected as
representatives of Jesus Christ :) 

**Bryce**

12:01 AM

I'm curious, what questions do Bishops ask when they use the Sexual
Purity section of 'For The strength of Youth' pamphlet to make their
questions?

The chat session has ended.

Today we’ll be discussing an aspect of Mormon history which will
overwhelm our narrative for the rest of 1842. Once a close friend and
confidant of the Prophet, now his greatest nemesis, an arch-rival of the
prophet if you will. After the historical timeline segment, we’ll wrap
up today’s show with a bit of a highlight reel of Sunstone and the live
show and get into a little listener feedback as well, so stay tuned for
the C segment.

When it comes to Mormon polygamy during the pre-Utah era, a lot has been
written about it. Historians have been working for a century and a half
to either prove or disprove that Joseph Smith and select Mormon elite
were practicing polygamy to some extent and we’re going to take on the
subject as our focus for today as the story has developed significantly
in spring of 1842.

To preface the essay for today, we have a certain advantage when it
comes to examining Nauvoo polygamy that many historians don’t have. What
I mean by that is most historians who’ve covered Nauvoo polygamy have
done so with an agenda to prove that what Joseph Smith was doing was
sanctioned of God, or that he wasn’t practicing it in general if the
historian comes from the RLDS tradition. We have the advantage of taking
our examination where the evidence leads us without the divinely
ordained part of the equation mucking up our analysis.

Nauvoo wasn’t the perfect little heaven on earth as it was frequently
claimed to be by missionaries and propaganda pieces in the Wasp and
Times and Seasons. A darker underbelly lurked behind those closed doors.
A brothel, run by the mayor, stood in the center of town within eyeshot
of Talos’ temple crown on the top of the hill, bearing a sign
designating the purpose of the house of ill-repute. Publicly, alcohol
sales were prohibited by statutes passed in early 1841, but grogshops
and grocery stores dotted the landscape just outside the boundaries of
Nauvoo city limits where a person seeking to satisfy their thirst were
half a day’s journey from all the local brew they could stomach. Or, if
you couldn’t make the journey out of town yourself, pop into the tavern
and inevitably a Pistol packin’ Porter Rockwell or some of his ilk would
be there with their private stores available at a premium for going to
the trouble of transporting the wares into town.

Debt and lack of steady work drove a lot of people to the bottle. Idle
hands are the devils workshop and too many Mormons were idle with only
fraternizing with their fellow Saints to pass the time. Thus, Nauvoo
became a rumor mill. Newspapers outside of Nauvoo picked up on rumors
and quickly turned them into fact.

This world of hushed whispers and fluctuating fealty to the prophet and
his cause sets our scene. If you read the minute books of the earliest
meetings of the Relief Society, you can easily come away with the
incorrect impression that it was formed for the sole purpose slowing the
rumor mill that was Nauvoo and keep the practice of polygamy under
wraps. Regardless of how many efforts were made to curtail the
propagation of murmuring, facts are stubborn things. By spring of 1842,
the prophet had taken about a dozen wives in secret, almost all of them
were members of the Relief Society. He wasn’t the only one. A few of the
Mormon elites and their wives were privy to the new and everlasting
covenant, thus adding credibility to the whispers.

Soon, Emma Smith took control of putting out the rumor-fires cropping up
all over town. Whether she wanted to or not didn’t seem to matter, the
rumors were about her husband, the pious prophet of the lord, and his
conduct directly affected nearly every aspect of her life, public and
private.

Mormon Enigma p. 108

“Emma called the second meeting of the Relief Society to order in the
lodge room and offered the invocation… Emma addressed the women:
“Measures to promote union in the Society must be carefully attended
to. Every member should be held in full fellowship… divest themselves of
every jealousy and ill feeling toward each other… We will bring our
conduct into respectability here and everywhere else. I rejoice in the
prospects before me.”

When Vilate Kimball asked for a restatement of the purposes of the
institution, Emma said, “No one need feel delicate in reference to
inquires about this society. There is nothing private. Its objects are
purely benevolent.”…

Emma reported that a young woman, Clarissa Marvel, “Was accused of
\[telling\] scandalous falsehoods on the character of Prest. Joseph
Smith without the least provocation,” and asked that “they would in
wisdom, adopt some plan to bring her to repentance.” She continued, “I
presume that most of \[you\] know more about Clarissa Marvel than I.”

There must have been silent consternation among a few in the group who
were privy to the teaching of celestial marriage. Joseph’s plural wife
Louisa Beaman sat in the meeting as did Sarah Peake Noon and Vilate
Kimball. Did Emma know that her husband had approached some women and
asked them to become his plural wives?

Agnes Coolbrith Smith, Don Carlos’s widow, came to the accused girl’s
defense, apparently unaware that gossip linked her own name to Joseph’s
“Clarissa Marvel lived with me nearly a year and I saw nothing amiss
of her,” she reported.

The women discussed the issue and agreed that someone should talk with
Clarissa Marvel, but nobody wanted to do it. One Hannah Markham was
given the task but she “objected on the grounds that she was
unacquainted with the circumstances.”

Emma acknowledged that the girl had no parents and needed friends, but
“we intend to look into the morals of each other, and watch over each
other. … All proceedings that regard difficulties should be kept among
the members… None can object to telling the good, but withhold the
evil.”

Springtime 1842 brought with it continually increasing rumors. There’s
no evidence that Clarissa Marvel ever was sealed to Joseph Smith, the
only evidence of their relationship lies within the rumors dealt with by
the Relief Society. But consider her place in society, a young woman,
possibly in her late teens or early twenties, orphaned with no friends,
she was a perfect mark for a predator like Joseph Smith. However, her
story has been lost to the annals of history and we only really have
these entries from the Relief Society minutes to even know that she was
a woman living in Nauvoo in the early 1840s.

We can’t know the result of any of the women meeting with her, history
doesn’t care what we want, it just exists. However, if the next meeting
of the Relief Society is any indication of what had transpired, we may
be able to draw some tentative conclusions from it.

“Undoubtedly word spread that the society was investigating Clarissa
Marvel. The third meeting opened with “The house full to overflowing.”
Joseph was in front with Emma and rose to speak. He talked briefly about
the society’s organization and observed that “none should be received
into the society but those who were worthy.” He advised, “The society
should grow by degrees, \[it\] should commence with a few
individuals—thus have a select Society of the virtuous and those who
will walk circumspectly … The society should move according to the
ancient Priesthood … \[I will\] make of this Society a kingdom of
priests as in Enoch’s day—as in Paul’s day.”

Joseph also commented on the women’s zeal to “purge out iniquity,” but
added that “sometimes \[your\] zeal is not according to knowledge.”

After that, Jo left the meeting to the direction of its president, Emma.
Clarissa’s case was still up in the air, the rumors had only gained
strength since the last meeting of the Relief Society. Jo’s language
conveyed a simple message at face value, but the way it was delivered
and his body language must have told a deeper story.

“Emma proceeded with business… As previous interviews with \[Clarissa
Marvel\] seemed to prove her innocent, Sarah Cleveland moved that
Elizabeth Durfee and Elizabeth Allred should investigate whoever had
reported her. Unknown to Emma, Joseph had already taught these older
women the principles of plural marriage. Sometimes referred to as
“Mothers in Israel,” they assisted Joseph by contacting women,
explaining the new order of marriage to them, and occasionally
delivering marriage proposals. Thus Mrs. Durfee was uncomfortably caught
between her role as Joseph’s emissary and her assignment to investigate
Clarissa Marvel. She objected. Emma encouraged, “We are going to learn
new things, our way is straight, we want none in this society but those
who could and would walk straight.” Within three days Clarissa Marvel
marked an X next to her name on the following statement: “This is to
certify that I never have at any time or place, seen or heard any thing
improper or unvirtuous in the conduct or conversation of either
President Smith or Mrs. Agnes Smith. I also certify that I never have
reported any thing derogatory to the characters of either of them.”
Apparently Emma took responsibility for closing the issue, for she told
the women that the “disagreeable business of searching out those who
were iniquitous seemed to fall on her.” Emma obviously did not know that
her widowed sister-in-law, Agnes Coolbrith Smith, had become a plural
wife of Joseph.”

These passages read as if Emma was able to keep things under control,
that would be a massive error in judgement as the rumors were only
abated for a very short time before the powder keg caught fire. The
statement signed by Clarissa Marvel doesn’t read as if she penned it,
that was crafted simply to have a legalistic signed statement to point
to when rumors of Jo and Clarissa became too prevalent to be waved away.
The selection of women to talk to Clarissa and deal with the rumors is
curious to say the least. Why did Emma task Elizabeth Durfee, Sarah
Cleveland, and Elizabeth Allred with putting down these salacious
rumors. They were all already Jo’s wives. Did she know they were her
sister-wives and knew they were good masons who could keep a secret, or
was she unaware and simply picked them as her trusted friends who she
knew she could rely on? That single detail in Emma’s decision-making
process is a question historians will never be able to answer but has
serious ramifications that hinge on Emma’s knowledge and involvement in
1842 polygamy.

The next Relief Society meeting is incredibly weird read out of context.
But, when we know another detail of 1842 history, it suddenly shifts
into focus. So, let’s discuss that before we read the next set of
meeting minutes.

Jo and John C. Wreck-it Bennett had a parting of ways in May of 1842,
where our historical timeline currently resides. It can be argued that
the entirety of their disagreements devolved to the practice of polygamy
alone. In fact, in June of 1842, an excommunicated member of the church
named Oliver Olney said “If Bennett had not moved quite so fast, all
would have been well.” The breakup between Jo and Bennett was ugly.
Bennett was practicing spiritual wifery, while Jo was practicing the
divinely sanctioned version of polygamy, the new and everlasting
covenant of celestial marriage. These were semantic labels used to cast
aspersions at Wreck-it Bennett and his overly aggressive practice of
polygamy, while Jo, Bloody Brigham Young, and Heber the Creeper Kimball
were much more calculated and secretive about it.

Let’s discuss John C. Bennett in a bit further detail. Once he broke
away from the Church, Jo collected a bunch of affidavits from which we
can gain a bit of a window into what Bennett was doing. His background
was as a physician specializing in obstetrics. He was likely familiar
with Thomsonian medicine, or practiced some form of herbal and vegetable
medicine, which held all sorts of wonderful cures for all sorts of
ailments associated with people fornicating. Thomsonian medicine
included “Bachelor’s Delight” as it was called, which was a tincture of
lobelia and some pain relieving herbs injected in the penis or vagina to
relieve symptoms from STIs. It also included a forerunner of what became
twilight sleep in the mid-20<sup>th</sup> century, administered during
labor which essentially knocked women out in between contractions and
often made them completely forget the pains of labor as they were only
semi-conscious during the process. And, of course, an obstetrician who
knew their way around roots and herbs knew exactly what could be
employed should a pregnancy become undesired for any reason.

The affidavit collected from Hyrum Smith about Wreck-it Bennett provides
the explicit reference to his method of acquiring women into his
personal practice of polygamy. Let me quickly preface this affidavit
before reading it. The way it’s worded, referring to Bennett’s methods,
clearly reveals that he was a Nauvoo elite who was privy to the
revelation on polygamy, even though modern D\&C 132 had yet to be
penned. This affidavit is mixed with language casting aspersions at
Bennett for what he did, but shows he was using words that Jo and the
other polygamous elite were using in propositioning women to become
their wives. Bennett was an insider and one of Jo’s few trusted Mormon
elite, until he wasn’t anymore and was used as a scapegoat for all the
rumors of adultery infecting Nauvoo.

HoC Vogel 5:70-71

“…testimony … by several females who testified that John C. Bennett
endeavored to seduce them, and accomplished his designs by saying it was
right; that it was one of the mysteries of God, which was to be revealed
when the people was strong enough in faith to bear such mysteries—that
it was perfectly right to have illicit intercourse with females,
providing no one knew it but themselves, vehemently trying them from day
to day, to yield to his passions, bringing witnesses of his own clan to
testify that there were such revelations and such commandments, and that
they were of God; also stating that he would be responsible for their
sins, if there were any, (That reads exactly like a number of Jo’s
propositions, here’s the kicker) and that he would give them medicine to
produce abortions, provided they should become pregnant.”

If you’ve ever questioned why Joseph Smith has almost no descendants,
even though he was married to well over 30 women, that question should
no longer remain. When we consider Bennett’s likely familiarity with
plants and herbs, the rest of the affidavit takes on a much darker tone.

“One of these witnesses, a married woman that he attended upon in his
professional capacity whilst she was sick, stated that he made proposals
to her of a similar nature; he told her that he wished her husband was
dead, and that if he was dead, he would marry her and clear out with
her; he also begged her permission to give him medicine to that effect;
he did try to give him medicine, but he would not take it. On
interrogating her what she thought of such teaching, she replied she was
sick at the time, and had to be lifted in and out of her bed like a
child.”

The rest of the affidavit reveals how much Bennett was becoming the
sacrificial lamb for Nauvoo polygamy by July of 1842 when it was
created. Let’s put a pin in Bennett and the public backlash from his
departure for a minute, we’ll get back to it very soon. I want to add
another piece to the root and herb puzzle here for which no explicit
evidence exists when it comes to Bennett, but constitutes a bit of
contextual speculation.

Datura and Belladonna were common medicines used in herbal remedies in
the 19<sup>th</sup> century, as well as long before that. One of the
active chemicals in these plants is scopolamine, which can be extracted
as a fine, white powder with a complicated bit of chemistry. At low
dosages, scopolamine acts as an anesthesia, treats muscle spasms for
those with Parkinson’s disease, and suppresses nausea and vomiting. It’s
even in seasickness patches you can buy over the counter as a
transdermal patch. However, in high doses Scopolamine is a hell of a
nasty drug. There was a VICE documentary done back in the late 00s where
the reporters went to Columbia and tracked down scopolamine and talked
to people who’d been affected by it. While it was VICE, so take that
with a grain of salt, the people they interviewed claimed that once
surreptitiously dosed with a tiny hit of scopolamine, as little as could
be passed on the edge of a business card, the victim would basically
become a mindless zombie. With a tiny bit of persuasion, the victim
would lead the person who dosed them to their own home, help them load
up their own furniture and belongings in the perpetrator’s vehicle, thus
robbing the victim blind with the victim’s help, then the person would
pass out and wake up to an empty home the next day and have no memory of
anything that had transpired the night before.

Let’s not view Nauvoo Mormonism through a presentist lens, allow me to
caveat a bit. Scopolamine is a highly refined white powder in pure form
and is legal in FDA approved forms for the uses I listed earlier. The
DEA hasn’t classified it as an illegal drug, but it has many illegal
uses. If you want to learn one aspect of how dark the world can be,
google scopolamine mind control, and read away. If you want a scholarly
take on it, you’ll find a link in the show notes to an article published
by the national institute of health in 1998 by J. Muller titled “Witch
ointments and aphrodisiacs”. Here’s the abstract:

The nightshades (solanaceae) were used as intoxicants since the ancient
civilisations and are still in use today. Their alkaloids, atropine and
scopolamine, were the major active substances of the ointments of
witches, of medieval "anaesthetics", and of modern poisons for murder.
In a medium dose-range the predominant symptoms are hallucinations and
illusions. This explains the use of nightshades in fortune-telling and
religious rituals. In higher doses the alkaloids produce coma and apnea.
Scopolamine enjoyed a particular popularity as a poison for murder. In
the 19th century the nightshade alkaloids were also in clinical use.
This article focusses on the medical history of the psychosis due to
intoxication with Solanaceae.

With that in mind, for an obstetrician with a notorious sex-drive, like
Bennett was rumored to have, who knew his way around plant medicines,
you can see how useful a psychoactive like scopolamine might have been
for some of his more obstinate prospective spiritual wives. Any further
information you can infer for yourself.

Music for ad

With that, let’s take a break and hear from this week’s sponsor,
49dollarsites.com

Music for ad

Pulling the pin back out of Bennett, as far as aborting pregnancies
specifically are concerned, a few other affidavits collected in 1842
reveal his other methods of causing abortions for the express purpose of
concealing polygamous relationships from the public.

From Mormonpolygamydocuments.org, Brian C. Hales brain dump website:

“Also, Mrs. Zeruiah Goddard affirmed on August 28, 1842: “Mrs. Pratt
stated to me that Dr. Bennett told her, that he could cause abortion
with perfect safety to the mother, at any stage of pregnancy, and that
he had frequently destroyed and removed infants before their time to
prevent exposure of the parties, and that he had instruments for that
purpose,
\&c.”[\[4\]](http://mormonpolygamydocuments.org/abortions/#_ftn4) Sarah
Pratt described the instrument Bennett may have used: “a pretty long
instrument of a kind I had never seen before. It seemed to be of steel
and was crooked at one end.”

I’m not a woman, but reading that turns my spine into shattered glass. I
want to be VERY clear here, the only real difference between Jo and
Bennett’s practices of polygamy was that Jo had a voice in his head
telling him it was okay, whereas Bennett had Jo’s voice in his head
saying it was okay. Spiritual wifery, celestial marriage, whatever label
you prefer, Jo and Bennett were doing the same immoral and heinous
things to satiate their physical desires. I simply can’t understand the
derision of Bennett from historians who go on to champion Joseph Smith
in the same paragraph, it’s appalling and completely dishonest.

Hopefully everything discussed so far offers a bit of a sobering look
into Bennett’s true role in Nauvoo history beyond his military and
political contributions.

Now that we understand a bit of Wreck-it Bennett and his practices, the
minutes from the next Relief Society meeting have a bit more context
when they say this:

“Before adjourning the meeting Emma read a document that Joseph and the
church leaders had prepared for the Relief Society in March. It stated
that some men were approaching women to “deceive and debauch the
innocent,” saying they had authority from Joseph or other church
leaders. “We have been informed that some unprincipled men … have been
guilty of such crimes—We do not mention their names, not knowing but
what there may be some among you who are not sufficiently skill’d in
Masonry as to keep a secret … Let this epistle be had as a private
matter in your Society, and then we shall learn whether you are good
masons.”

That epistle was prepared by Jo and signed by him, Hyrum Side-kick Abiff
Smith, Heber the Creeper Kimball, White-out Willard Richards, Vinson
Knight, and Bloody Brigham Young.

They prepared it in March and it was read to the Relief Society at the
end of April, and then we find in the history of the Church vol. 5:12
when Bennett and Jo finally broke and immediately the finger-pointing
began to use Bennett as the scapegoat for Nauvoo’s adultery rumors.

“Thursday \[May\] 19.—It rained, and I was at home until one o’clock:
when I attended a special session of the city council. John C. Bennett
having discovered that his whoredoms and abominations were fast coming
to light, and that the indignation of an insulated and abused people
were rising rapidly against him, thought best to make a virtue of
necessity, and try to make it appear that he was innocent, by resigning
his office of Mayor, which the council most gladly accepted; and Joseph
Smith was elected mayor of the City of Nauvoo by the council, and Hyrum
Smith, Vice-Mayor.”

They even forced Bennett to appear before Alderman Daniel H. Wells and
swear a testimony to clear Jo’s name. They clearly had a lot on Bennett,
but as we’ll come to learn, Bennett had a lot on the Mormon elites as
well so there’s plenty of dispute as to who had the real leverage here.
All Bennett had to lose was his office as Mayor, Jo had the reputation
of a pious and holy monogamous prophet on the line with roughly 10,000
people under his spell which could have easily been undermined or
destroyed if any credible allegations of adultery rose to the surface.

Some of the language in this signed statement by Bennett that we’re
about to read leaves room, you’ll see what I mean. Read at face value,
the statement seems like an unequivocal condemnation of adultery, but in
order to understand the language, we need to understand that Jo and the
Mormon elites saw the law of God as superior to the laws of the United
States. When the law of God came into conflict with the law of the land,
the law of God was held to until that could no longer be the case; see
the 1838 Mormon war in Missouri and resulting incarceration in Liberty
Jail as a prime example. Jo had illustrated regularly throughout his
history a reckless disregard for law because he was operating by the
dictates of his own personal God who directed him as a voice in his
head. So, when it comes to what was considered illegal, or illicit
intercourse with females in this statement, we have to judge it by what
standard of laws it was considered illegal. If it was seen as good in
the eyes of the Lord as had been repeatedly justified by Jo up to this
point, the practice of celestial marriage wasn’t illegal or illicit
intercourse with females. Adultery was illegal, spiritual wifery was
illegal, celestial marriage, however, is not only sanctioned by God and
therefore legal, but explicitly commanded by God in order to achieve
celestial glory.

“John C. Bennett, who being duly sworn according to law, deposeth and
sayeth, that he never was taught anything in the least contrary to the
strictest principles of the gospel, or of virtue, or of the laws of God
or man, under any circumstances, or upon any occasion, either directly
or indirectly, in word or deed, by Joseph Smith; and that he never knew
the said Smith to countenance any improper conduct whatever, either in
public or private; and that he never did teach to me in private that an
illegal, illicit intercourse with females, was, under any circumstances,
justifiable, and that I never knew him so to teach others.

JOHN C. BENNETT”

With that signed statement, Bennett’s role in Mormon hierarchy was
erased.

Bennett, once the highest governmental authority and second in military
command to Joseph Smith, a powerful member of the Mormon elite, was now
used up and thrown aside after the sins of the Mormon forefathers were
cast upon him and the blighted scapegoat was removed from his positions
of influence and authority. Now, Jo and Hyrum Smith were the most
powerful men in town holding the top two positions in the Church,
military, and city government. Jo and Hyrum could trust each other,
Bennett obviously couldn’t be controlled anymore. Jo and Hyrum were now
Prophet and assistant president of Mormonism, Lieutenant-General and
Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion, and Mayor and Vice-Mayor of Nauvoo,
the largest city in Illinois at that time.

The disastrous excision of Bennett was just as much over his brazen and
gluttonous practice of polygamy as it was a power grab by Jo and Hyrum,
and it worked. So, let’s try and tease this apart. What happened between
Jo and Bennett to cause such a riff.

To rewind a little bit, Bennett had won the confidence of Jo quickly
upon his arrival in Nauvoo. Episode 62 introduced Bennett where we
discussed the letter exchanges between him and Jo as Commerce, Illinois
was still in its infantile stages and the refugee Mormons were living
out of wagons and lean-to shacks hastily constructed to keep the
spring-time rain off their backs.

Once Bennett joined the church, his charisma led to a meteoric rise up
the ranks of Mormon hierarchy. He began as just another guy, but Jo
quickly gravitated to Bennett, likely due to his office and political
connections. At the time, Bennett was quartermaster-general of the state
of Illinois. Such an office was really convenient for Jo to befriend as
he was trying to amass a militia which would soon become the Nauvoo
Legion. If Jo wanted to arm them with more than just sticks and rocks,
Bennett was the perfect friend to have as the quartermaster-general
controlled the munitions and arms for the state militia’s armories.

Beyond that, Bennett was something of a polymath, a lover of all fields
of knowledge, an ascended master-mason for nearly 15 years, and was well
connected to Illinois politicians. Bennett was a powerful asset for Jo
to have in his back pocket.

Autumn of 1840 came around and the Mormon leadership wanted to have
Commerce turned into a recognized city of the state of Illinois. We
covered this is episode 66, God Mode Jo where Bennett and Robert B.
Thompson worked under the direction of Joseph Smith to draft the Nauvoo
Charter. Bennett took the charter to Springville and got it passed, thus
officially forming the city of Nauvoo, establishing various public works
projects and organizations, sanctioning legal taxation, and granting a
legal militia called the Nauvoo Legion. Bennett was paramount to the
success of the Charter being passed and probably pulled a few political
favors to get it approved and pushed through so quickly in the final
weeks of 1840. January 1841 rolled around, Bennett presented the Nauvoo
Charter to the Mormon high council as his and Jo’s own creation, and
suddenly Bennett had a special place in Jo’s heart as someone who could
be trusted to execute whatever task he was given for the benefit of the
Saints.

Because Nauvoo was so destitute and so few homes existed, Bennett moved
in with the Smiths and lived with them for over two years. According to
Newell and Avery in Mormon Enigma, Emma didn’t like Wreck-it Bennett,
but held her tongue.

“The year of Joseph, Sr.’s death, John Cook Bennett arrived in Nauvoo,
joined the church, and found a temporary place to live in Emma’s home.
About five feet, nine inches tall, a handsome man with graying dark hair
and black eyes, he was broad-shouldered, with a trim waist and hips. His
face was rather thin, his mouth tight-lipped, and his manner
ingratiating and smoothly polite. He had an air about him that annoyed
Emma, and young Joseph recalled that she disliked him from the very
first. Although Bennett made much of his abilities as a physician when
he came to Nauvoo, Emma distrusted him enough to refuse to take his
prescribed medicine during and illness. He lost further influence with
her when he pulled young Joseph’s tooth with a “turn key” and the boy
bled severely before a solution made of saltpeter on leather shaving
finally checked the bleeding. Bennett had better luck with the community
as a whole when he offered the suffering Mormons quinine for their
malaria.

After he had found another place to live, he still took many of his
meals at Emma’s house. Young Joseph recalled that his mother would set a
loaf of her bread in front of the fire until the end was toasted brown,
then cut off a thin slice and replaced the loaf. Thus she prepared
Bennett’s supper of toasted bread and milk, “just as he liked it.” He
expounded on a new food just coming into bogue, claiming that the “love
apple” or tomato, had beneficial medicinal qualities.”

Further describing his personality and how it attracted Jo using
contemporary accounts, Newell and Avery continue:

“Bennett seemed to know something about almost everything. This
impressed Joseph, who needed an urbane representative for the church. He
hoped to have Nauvoo chartered under the state of Illinois. Bennett
offered to guide the proposed documents through the legislature and did
his job well by developing sympathy for the Mormons through graphic
descriptions of the Missouri persecutions. The charters passed without
so much as a complete reading, giving the elected officers of the city
broad powers…

Triumphant from his session with the Illinois legislature, which passed
the charters on December 16, 1840, John C. Bennett returned to Nauvoo in
time to be elected the city’s first mayor on February 1 of the new year.
Few Saints knew Bennett. That he secured such a high office so rapidly
suggest that Joseph trusted him implicitly and had spoken on his
behalf.”

To summarize, a person isn’t elected or appointed to the office of
quartermaster-general without military training. Although never involved
in any war, Bennett passed his military training to the Mormon
leadership in organizing the Nauvoo legion with officers with their own
companies and helped organize multiple public marches to display the
power of the Legion at full steam.

Being a trusted Mormon elite had its an entire benefits package. Bennett
enjoyed a small income as Mayor of Nauvoo, possibly even taking a little
from the tithing income to supplement his growing wealth, a pleasant bit
of fraternity with the other Mormon elites and exemption from the
commandments followed by the rank-and-file Mormons who were mindlessly
following the prophet as they’d been doing for years by this point, oh,
yeah, and polygamy. The Mormon elite enjoyed the benefits of polygamy.
By the time Jo and Wreck-it Bennett had their falling out, Jo had
relationships with at least 10 women, possibly as many as 14 that are
documentable, which says nothing of any trips the prophet may have made
to Nauvoo’s brothel, which was owned and run by Wreck-it Bennett.

Bloody Brigham Young had already locked Martha Brotherton up in the
upper floor of the Red Brick Store and propositioned her with the help
of Jo, she was a whole 17 years old when that happened. For religious
leaders of a patriarchal religion, the doctrine of polygamy definitely
had its benefits.

I want to deal with a bit of apologetics here. It’s often claimed with a
few quotes to substantiate it that the men who were commanded by the
lord to practice polygamy overwhelmingly were opposed to it. Brigham
Young said when he learned of polygamy that it was the first time he’d
desired the grave. Jo had a hard time telling Emma about it because he
knew she wouldn’t understand that polygamy was a commandment from God,
but Jo HAD to practice it BECAUSE it was a commandment from God,
regardless of what Emma and the Mormons thought of it. The Mormon
hierarchy were forced to practice polygamy solely because it was a
divine commandment from on high, their status and the benefits of having
so many secretive partners had absolutely no influence on the revelation
coming forward.

Hopefully you can see the error in logic here, it’s putting the cart
before the horse. If you view Jo’s hundred + revelations through a
naturalistic lens you see just how self-serving they are and the
polygamy revelation was no different. So, let’s follow that line of
naturalistic logic where it leads us. Of course Emma was opposed to Jo
taking 30 plus wives while she was commanded to cleave to her husband
and none else. Further, Wreck-it Bennett was unhinged, probably
propositioning dozens of women which would blow the cover of the other
men who were taking wives and keeping it under wraps enough for that
information to be no more than idle rumors.

Once it became public that Bennett was propositioning so many women to
have affairs, it required Jo and the other elites to distance themselves
so as not to be looped in with the Saintly Scoundrel, as he’s been
labeled by Mormon historians since he broke off from the Church. Thus,
the term spiritual wifery was used as a derogatory label against
Wreck-it Bennett, William Smith, and any other Mormon elite who was
exposed, while the term “new and everlasting covenant” was manufactured
to label just those celestial polygamous marriages which were sanctioned
by Jo. Much of the existing scholarship concerning Wreck-it Bennett and
polygamy has drawn a difference between what Jo was doing as divine
commandment and what Bennett was doing as just wanting to sleep with as
many women as he could. We won’t waste our time with such absurdities
here except to understand how Bennett and the fallout following his
disaffection was dealt with by Jo and the remaining elites at the time.
Jo and Wreck-it Bennett were kindred spirits in more ways than we can
imagine.

Jo and Bennett’s relationship had been waning for some time. Whether it
was out of disagreements concerning the best way to run the Nauvoo
Legion, how Nauvoo city government should have been run, doctrinal
differences, Jo’s intemperance while Bennett was a vitriolic teetotaler,
we don’t know exactly what the crux of the disagreement was. What
historians can be sure of is that Bennett was too open and brazen with
his spiritual wifery system which threatened the fragile system of
secrecy Jo had been constructing for the past 6 years which was known as
celestial marriage. Honestly, considering the women Jo had propositioned
leading up to spring of 1842, he’d been cultivating relationships and
grooming these women for years. Bennett had been there for about 2 years
and was suddenly hitting up women all over town to sleep with him.
Bennett was a threat to everything Jo had been working on for over a
decade.

Add in to the mix the fact that Bennett was running a brothel in Nauvoo
to connect any of the elites or any visiting wealthy men with quick
satisfaction of their lusts, Bennett was completely rogue and could no
longer be trusted.

But the divide between Jo and Bennett was recent, their relationship
prior to this vicious breakup was more than just friendly acquaintances.
Articulating Jo and Bennett’s relationship is a letter printed in the
History of the Saints 1842 from George W. Robinson, Hingepin Rigdon’s
son-in-law to one James Arlington Bennett, no relation to John C.
Bennett. It wraps their relationship around the story of Jo
propositioning Nancy Rigdon, Hingepin Rigdon’s daughter, the author is a
firsthand witness to the events described and wrote this a mere few
weeks after it occurred. This is an incredibly reliable document and
offers some crucial details.

“Smith and Bennett have always been on very friendly terms, and were
together a great deal, and I have no doubt but that Bennett was Smith’s
confidant in nearly all things. It appears from General Bennett’s story,
that … Smith sent for Miss Rigdon … took her into another room, and
locked the door, … She repulsed him, and was about to raise the
neighbors if he did not unlock the door … she left … came home and told
her father of the transaction; upon which Smith was sent for. He came.
She told the tale in the presence of all the family, and to Smith’s
face. I was present. Smith attempted to deny it at first, and face her
down with the lie; but she told the facts with so much earnestness, and
the fact of a letter being present, which he had caused to be written to
her, on the same subject, the day after the attempt made on her virtue,
breathing the same spirit, and which he had fondly hoped was
destroyed,--all came with such force that he could not withstand the
testimony; and he then and there acknowledged that every word of Miss
Rigdon’s testimony was true. Now for his excuse, which he made for such
a base attempt, and for using the name of the Lord in vain, on that
occasion. He wished to ascertain whether she was virtuous or not, and
took that course to learn the facts\!\!\! I would say, sir, that I have
reason to believe General Bennett’s story in the disclosures of Smith’s
rascality; although I am not a witness to all of the facts, yet I am to
some.”

Prior to spring of 1842, Jo and Bennett were best buds with similar
goals in mind. We can’t escape that fact. All the worst qualities which
have been ascribed to Bennett after the fact were exhibited at some
level at different time by Joseph Smith. Bennett was just a brazen
distilled version of all of Jo’s worst qualities, but that makes them
more similar than it does different. They were both scoundrels.

To complicate things further, it should be noted that Bennett may have
had some dreams of being the head of Nauvoo at some point. At least, he
wanted Jo out of the way and probably would allow the chips to fall
where they may. As second in command over the Nauvoo legion and mayor of
Nauvoo, if some tragedy happened to befall Jo and he was conveniently no
longer the leader of the town or religion, Bennett stood in a calculated
position to usurp all Jo’s power and authority.

A Nauvoo Legion sham battle demonstration was set to happen on May 7,
1842. The Nauvoo Legion had conducted a number of parades and whatnot,
including July 4<sup>th</sup> celebrations and a major demonstration
during the Nauvoo Temple cornerstone laying ceremony, so this was
nothing out of the ordinary. During the demonstrations and parades, Jo
would be in full Lieutenant-General regalia, decorated with his pistols
and military sword, riding his horse at the head of the Legion or
standing atop a stage making a grand speech of all sorts. During all
these, Wreck-it Bennett, as Major-General, would be at his right hand in
his military dress.

Once again from Newell and Avery in Mormon Enigma:

“Joseph wore a blue coat, gold-colored epaulets, high black boots, and a
sweeping hat toped with ostrich feathers. He carried an impressive
sword. Only John C. Bennett outshone him, resplendent in gold braid,
buttons, and tassels. Emma and the wives of ‘other distinguished
officers accompanied their companions on parade.’ One woman later wrote
of Emma’s fondness for horses and said she ‘could manage them well in
riding or driving. Many can recall seeing her mounted on horseback
beside her husband in military parade and a grander couple could nowhere
be found. She always dressed becomingly, and a riding costume showed off
her shapely figure to the best advantage’”.

This military parade was different. Something smelled fishy to Jo and
his instincts hadn’t let him down yet. His journal reads as follows at
the end of April, 1842, a mere week before the sham battle was set to
take place:

“A conspiracy against the peace of my family was made manifest, and it
gave me some trouble to counteract the design of certain base
individuals, and restore peace. The Lord makes manifest to me many
things, which it is not wisdom for me to make public.”

We can rest assured, the conspiracy was orchestrated by Wreck-it
Bennett. He had specific instructions for his commanding officer,
Lieutenant-General Joseph Smith. At the behest of Bennett, Jo was
supposed to stand in a specific place during the sham battle, Jo’s seer
senses were tingling. He decided it would be better to be stationed at a
place where he would be able to watch his back, but Bennett’s odd
request didn’t escape his notice nor recollection in his journal for the
day.

“Why did \[Bennett\] request me to command one of the cohorts, and also
to take my position without my staff, during the sham battle on the
seventh of May, 1842, where my life might have been forfeited and no man
have known who did the deed?” Quoted from B.H. Roberts the Rise and Fall
of Nauvoo p. 135

The Bennett nuke had gone off and finally his NaMo nickname truly comes
into play as Bennett truly wrecked it all. The fallout wasn’t fully
understood in mid-May 1842 when Bennett submitted his resignation from
the office of Mayor. The distinction between Bennett’s spiritual wifery
and Jo’s celestial marriage hadn’t even been crafted yet as the vast
scope of the impact of his adultery was only just starting to be
understood.

In June 1842, Jo wrote a letter to Governor Carlin of Missouri detailing
some of the early arguments used to distance Bennett and his practices
of adultery from the practices of other Mormon elites.

Mormonism Shadow or Reality, HoC 5:42

“Dear Sir:--It becomes my duty to lay before you some facts relative to
the conduct of our major-general, John C. Bennett,…

It is evident that his general character is that of an adulterer of the
worst kind,…

Some time ago it having been reported to me that some of the most
aggravated cases of adultery had been committed upon some previously
respectable females in our city,…

More than twenty months ago Bennett went to a lady in the city and began
to teach her that promiscuous intercourse between the sexes was lawful
and no harm in it, and requested the privilege of gratifying his
passions,…

Finding this argument ineffectual, he told her that men in higher
standing in the Church than himself not only sanctioned, but practiced
the same deeds; and in order to finish the controversy, said and
affirmed that I both taught and acted in the same manner, but publicly
proclaimed against \[it\] in consequence of the prejudice of the people,
and for fear of trouble in my own house. By this means he accomplished
his designs; he seduced a respectable female with lying, and subjected
her to public infamy and disgrace.

Not contented with what he had already done, he made the attempt on
others, and by using the same language, seduced them also.”

Wreck-it Bennett’s role in Mormonism is complicated to say the least. He
was merely an extreme version of what a few of the elites were doing,
and completely unapologetic about it. It strikes me that Bennett
certainly would have thrived in Brigham’s Utah Mormonism much moreso
than he did for his brief stint with Joseph in Nauvoo. He exhibited a
number of useful qualities which would have caused Brigham to gravitate
towards garnering his favor and rewarding him with all the property and
wives as was typical for Utah-Mormon elites who carried out Brigham’s
rule. However, his personality created conflicts as he was beholden to
none other than himself. He was an opportunist at heart and only seized
said opportunities when it would do him well. The Mormon refugees
presented a wealth of opportunities and rumors of polygamy had followed
them from Kirtland, making their society quite attractive to a character
like Bennett. After his baptism, he continued to leverage his charisma
and personality to elevate his own status higher and higher until he was
second only to Joseph Smith in political and ecclesiastical leadership.
But, he was a flash in the pan, and now the whole damn kitchen was on
fire.

We’ll continue to cover the damage and fallout of Bennett as well as
track him as he publishes against the Church and Joseph Smith, thus
becoming the greatest enemy of the Church for the remainder of 1842.
Eventually he published his 300+ page expose on the Church, titled
History of the Saints, for which historians owe a great debt to Bennett.
Without his expose, a number of aspects of the history of Nauvoo
polygamy would be shrouded in mystery.

To conclude, I want to try and venture out onto a limb here. I welcome
comment from anybody who’s willing to give it, but please bear with me
while I opine on Bennett’s role in Mormon polygamy, specifically him
providing abortions for the women who were the victims of Nauvoo
polygamy.

I can’t empathize with what it was like to be a woman in
19<sup>th</sup>-century Protestant Victorian America. None of us can. I
can’t even empathize with what it’s like to be a woman today, so what
I’m about to say isn’t an exercise in trying to empathize with, but
merely to intellectually understand the plight of Mormon women in Nauvoo
Mormonism. Today, a woman having a child out of wedlock carries a
certain stigma with it. Shame, seems like the right word to use, but
it’s much deeper and more individualized than that. Consider how much
worse it must have been for women having children out of wedlock in
19<sup>th</sup>-century America, when they couldn’t own a business,
vote, sign contracts, hold any personal property or any of the other
rights the women’s suffrage movement brought to the world. A woman with
a bastard child in 19<sup>th</sup>-century America had to provide for
her child or children and frequently the most lucrative business she
could go into that would actually provide for them was prostitution.
Sure, she could weave baskets, sew, paint rugs, be a house-servant, but
those rarely paid enough to support her, let alone a family with hungry
bastard children at home. The men never really had to deal with those
constraints. They could sleep around as they saw fit and never suffer
the consequences. A man could have dozens of illegitimate children and
never have his standard of living affected by it. In days before
condoms, birth control usually wasn’t prophylactic, it was responsive
after pregnancy was realized, which could be weeks or even a couple
months after the sexual encounter occurred.

Now consider the status of women in Nauvoo when rumors floated around
that they were having sex with the prophet, do you think they would be
believed? Young Clarissa Marvel with no parents or loved ones to support
her and no friends to rely on, just starts showing one day and says it’s
Joseph’s child, do you think she would be believed? How might those
allegations affect her life? Jo was insulated by his social status, he
wouldn’t be affected, what would happen to her? What would happen to her
illegitimate child? How could she make ends meet? Go work in Bennett’s
brothel where life expectancy for women was probably one third the
national average and life was filled with degrading encounters, horrible
STIs with nothing to dull the symptoms? What were her options?

So, bearing that in mind, what can be said of the morality of Bennett
performing abortions for the dozens of affairs that Mormon elite were
having? Look the whole situation is fraught with immoral actions
perpetrated by the Mormon elite and them never having to suffer
consequences for their actions. The women they took into spiritual
wifery were coerced into it and they were largely uninformed of what was
truly going on. The mothers of Israel who would teach the doctrine of
polygamy to the younger women Jo wanted to take were coerced into their
positions as well before they coerced the younger women to agree to the
adulterous affairs. The power dynamic created by Jo and his elite is a
horrifically damaging construct in and of itself and the women who
suffered from it had no recourse for what they were put through.

I don’t want to over-generalize here, because there are a few possible
willing participants, but I’m speaking to the broader trends of society
and the way women having children out of wedlock were treated in that
society.

Given all of that context, and some of you may find this disagreeable
and I welcome your feedback, wasn’t it the most moral thing for these
women to undergo abortions, given what life held for them if they had
the child? Granted, they had absolutely no decision-making power in all
of it and when the women who were victims of Joseph Smith or any of the
other Mormon elite had no real choice in the proposal, the marriage, the
intercourse, or in whether or not they kept the child, everything about
that whole process is completely broken and immoral. So, with all of
that considered, wasn’t them not being damned into a life of destitution
and likely sex slavery the best possible option because Mormon and
19<sup>th</sup>-century American society was so fundamentally broken?

Look, I can never understand what it must have been like, I’m only
interested in understanding what happened at an intellectual level and
all the nuance and emotion baked into the subject renders it immediately
controversial and polarizing. I just haven’t ever seen a paper which
allowed for the nuance I just opined with, they’re all written from a
viewpoint of Bennett’s polygamy was bad, Jo’s polygamy was good, and the
abortions never happened because Jo wasn’t getting married to all these
women to have sex with them. The subject requires nuance and a realistic
view of the world from whence Mormonism came.

But, what is that world? I think it’s important to recognize what was
really going on in Nauvoo Mormonism, because it informs us why the
Church is the way it is today. Joseph Smith was a sexual predator. We
simply can’t escape that fact. For all his flaws, his predatory
practices may truly be the most heinous and evil of all and what has
impacted the most people directly since the foundation of the Church.

We see the uprising of people speaking out about the church and its
current practices when it comes to how it deals with sexuality. Sam
Young of ProtectLDSChildren is on a hunger strike to get bishop’s
interviews policies changed and has so far been met with silence. I went
to Mormon.org and chatted with some missionaries about worthiness
interviews and they were happy to point me to the church’s official
statements regarding bishops interviews and Sam Young, and I’m going to
continue to open up a new chat window everyday with new missionaries for
the foreseeable future because it’s literally the very least I can do to
support ProtectLDSChildren from afar, beyond just sharing Sam’s videos.

Look, the entire reason that ProtectLDSChildren exists is because
Mormons have sex abuse inflicted on them every single day. Whether
covert by shaming sexual desires, or overt where a bishop or leader of
some kind actually sexually assaults somebody, there are fundamental
issues with the Church that must be addressed and changed. People often
deal with it by saying that there may be some in Church leadership
positions who are sexual predators, but 99% of bishops are the nicest
people you’ll ever meet. That’s not an answer, it’s a deflection. The
issue is how the church treats sexuality. So, are there sexual predators
in leadership roles in the Church? Joseph Smith was a sexual predator.
Make no mistake, Brigham Young locked up Martha Brotherton in a room and
a sexual encounter nearly happened. Joseph Smith locked up one of his
best friend’s daughters in a room, Nancy Rigdon, and would have
assaulted her if she didn’t fend him off and threaten to scream out for
help.

From the 2 original prophets of the Mormon religion, sex abuse hasn’t
been a problem that a small percentage of the leadership has
perpetrated, the 2 founding prophets tried to rape teenagers. This isn’t
a problem affecting just a few bishops while 99% of them are good men,
it’s a problem stemming from the very roots of Mormonism. The Church and
its problems with sex abuse lie at its foundation. The seeds are
corrupt, and what we see today is a moderation of its past practices,
not some aberration that only comes now because woke liberals are crying
about it. Sex abuse, whether that’s as simple as shaming a person’s
sexual desires or it’s literal overt assault, is an issue the church has
been wrestling with since September 1830. Millions of people have lived
and died as members since then and they’ve all grown up with a warped
perspective of what human sexuality is, but it’s much deeper than that.
Some unknown percentage of Mormons have been directly sexually abused by
Mormon leadership figures who’ve used their status in the community to
create a situation where the assault could take place. Joseph Smith
raped early Mormon women. People are raped today in the church and as
we’ve seen repeatedly, the Church has likely paid out billions in
settlements to cover up for those abuses.

Salt Lake City isn’t the perfect little heaven on earth as it’s
frequently claimed to be by missionaries and propaganda pieces in the
Ensign or Deseret News. A darker underbelly lurks behind those closed
doors.

B2C

Answer listener mail about phone call during patreon edition last
episode

Rhiannon Ball email with all the questions

Zelph on the Shelf video

Mr. Atheist “The Political Rise of Joseph Smith feat Naked Mormonism”
also for NaMo HE 8/13
