---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 93 - CC Protect LDS Children'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-93-cc-protect-lds-children/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-93-cc-protect-lds-children
category: History
date: 2018-03-09 07:10:16 +0000
---

Ep 93 -- CC Protect LDS Children

On this episode, we invite Sam Young of the Protect LDS Children
campaign. Currently, Sam's petition has over 16,000 signatures urging
the LDS Church to change its policy concerning how Bishop's interviews
are conducted. As it currently stands, Bishops frequently ask sexually
explicit questions during regular interviews in a child's development,
one-on-one, behind closed doors, perpetuating a cycle of shame and
creating situations where sexual grooming is normalized. March 30, 2018
marks the public march to the Church Office Building in Salt Lake City
to deliver the petition to the Church along with collected stories from
people who've been affected by these invasive interviews. Please
consider joining us in this grassroots movement, whether you simply sign
the petition, share your personal story, or you're able to make it to
the march, Sam needs our support. This episode is longer than usual and
it's punctuated by stories which may cause some listeners to feel
triggered; listener discretion advised.

Links:

Campaign Website\
<http://protectldschildren.org/>

Read the Stories here\
<http://protectldschildren.org/read-the-stories-2/>

P LDS C Facebook Page\
<https://www.facebook.com/ProtectLDSChildren/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Protect LDS Children

Stories:

It's been a bit of a struggle deciding what to do for this week's show.
Our regular episodes are typically a main history segment with a
followup interview related to the subject matter of the history segment.
However, this week is a bit different for a few crucial reasons.

Every first Monday of the month, we do our NaMo Home Evenings Google
Hangouts which are reserved for listeners who support the show over at
Patreon.com/nakedmormonism, but this month's hangout was simply too
important and timely to not air on the regular feed. What you're about
to hear is a conversation with Sam Young, the figurehead of the Protect
LDS Children campaign who is currently organizing a march on the Church
Office Building set to launch on March 30^th^, 2018. We discuss the
campaign in detail and Sam fields a number of important questions from
yours truly and from those who joined the call. It's over an hour and a
half. I've also decided to strategically break it up by peppering in a
few of the stories people have sent in through Protect LDS Children.org,
making the entire episode well over 2 hours. It's a long one, but it's
well worth the listen.

If you've personally been affected by invasive Bishop's interviews, I
encourage you to go to the campaign website and write in your story,
many of them are completely anonymous which is the writer's prerogative.
Any Utah listeners out there hearing this prior to March 30, 2018, I
hope you'll seriously consider joining us at noon that day in front of
the Church Office Building in Salt Lake City to march for this crucially
important cause. You'll find links in the show notes to Sam's other
podcast interviews and media appearances where you can gain a full grasp
of the scope and desires of the campaign.

Before getting into the episode, I'm issuing a blanket trigger warning.
Some of the issues discussed in the interview are of a sexual nature.
Beyond that, some of the stories posted on the Protect LDS Children
website discuss some very explicit sexual matters as well as suicide and
suicide attempts. This episode may be hard for some of you to get
through and if you feel you may be triggered by any of those subjects,
you may want to skip some parts or even the entire episode. I'll voice
specific trigger warnings when a story is particularly painful, but
these stories matter and they need to be on the record. At the end of
the interview I'll voice some additional concluding thoughts. You have
been warned. Without further ado, here's Sam Young.

\#371 Name Hidden. CS: 1,2,4,7. Other: Loss of innocence.

When I was a very naive 12 year old, I attended my first bishops
interview. I was scared & really had no idea what to expect. I was
intimidated by anyone in a leadership position.

I think it all started out fine and then was hit with a question that I
never imagined being asked.

"Are you and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, (my best friend at the time), lesbians?"
To be honest I had no idea what a lesbian was. So I said I didn't think
so, and asked what it was. He continued to ask me if her and I were
inappropriately touching each other. I was MORTIFIED. I was as naive as
they come and had never once even had that thought cross my mind. I was
your typical silly 12 year old girl. We lived where there weren't a ton
of Mormons around, so when we would all get together for activities and
see each other at church it was so much fun. We all had a special bond.

Well, he continued to ask me if I masturbated. Again, not a clue what
that was. So he continued to teach me about masturbation. Including, how
horrible it is. I had never been more embarrassed and ashamed in my
life. I hadn't even done what he was asking, yet still felt like I
should feel guilty.

I wanted to share because this conversation has stuck with me for YEARS.
I constantly was worried that my innocent friendships with girls, were
not really considered innocent. Or that I was doing something wrong by
merely having a best friend. I was so self conscious. Did I giggle too
much, did we hang out too much, what was I doing to make people think
this? Did everyone see something I didn't??

I am so emotional writing this because it took such a toll on my
innocence. I now have 2 daughters, and the thought of them going through
what I did, makes me sick. My children WILL never be alone in a room
with a man of authority over them. No matter how much I trust him.

I know there are so many stories far more damaging than mine. To my 12
year old self, however, it was horrific.

It changed me.

Trigger: Abuse, strong language

\#374 Name Hidden. CS: 1. Other: Defending physical abuse by a
priesthood holding father.

My sister and I, at different times in our respective childhoods
mustered up the courage to tell the bishop about our dad, who
physically, emotional and mentally abused us and our mother. I went in
when I thought he might kill my mom after watching him choke her. I told
my bishop about how he kicked, pulled hair, called us stupid bitches,
and knocked me to the ground. My sister in a different interview told
him about how our dad had pinned to her to the bed and choked her, and
that he threw plates at her that missed and broke into pieces against
the wall. I was only 100 lbs and my sister was much smaller. I once told
my dad that he might kill us someday, to which he replied "no, I won't
let it get that far." But here's the problem: He was the ward clerk and
a "righteous" and respected priesthood holder. I protested that he
should not have a temple recommend and that he was a horrible human
being. My sister and I both got the same response,"honor your father and
mother." I thought, didn't you hear me? I had to threaten to call the
cops to get him to let go of my mother's throat! The interview ended and
decided that I was right not to tell anyone all along. They simply
didn't care. By the time the next bishop was was called we had helped my
mom kick him out, with the help of police, and she had picture evidence
of being punched. The judge at their divorce hearing told him to never
hurt a woman and granted her a much needed restraining order. After all
this, the new bishop called my mother in for an interview, along with my
little sister (I had moved out). They obediently went and, not long
after sitting down, found that it was all a trick. The bishop had my dad
come into the room so he could "just talk to her" about her breaking up
the family. This bishop was clearly breaking the law and he knew it.
They blamed my mother for the divorce. My mom and sister got up and
left, not knowing that they could not count on a bishop to protect them.
How can battered women ever escape in a system like this? And why don't
they matter? This was over a period where we had had a total of six
bishops. The three of us do not believe bishops to have special
discernment in the least. -B

Trigger: sexual assault, suicide

\#299 Name Withheld. CS: 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9

I was a 14 year old child. I was raped. Had just had a lesson on
"virtue", the week before. I was so traumatized. I didn't tell my
parents because of the whole "it would be better to have your child come
home in a pine box than to lose their virtue", rhetoric. I went to my
bishop because I thought I had committed the sin second only unto
murder.

I was asked if i was morally clean. I said no. He asked what happened. I
told him that a boy I was acquaintances with had forced himself on me.

He asked what I had done to provoke the boy. He asked what I was
wearing. He asked me to describe exactly what my rapist did to me. He
asked me how I felt while it was happening. He asked if I orgasmed
during the assault. He asked if I had had ever "done this" before. He
asked if I liked it. Where did he, my rapist, put his hands? How many
fingers did he put inside me?

Then he told me I had committed a serious sin and must repent for my
part in it.

I was forced to repeat this in front of the bishop, his counselors and
the clerk. Every time I was asked a question it was like being raped
again. 6 months disfellowshipped.

That night I tried to kill myself, the first of many tries. Luckily, I
never succeeded.

I can directly pinpoint years of suicidal ideation to this incident. My
bishop should have called the police. He should have comforted me and
helped me to see that it was an assault. No consent. Instead I was
punished for my rape.

I know I am not alone in this. I know there are other survivors of
sexual assault who have experienced the same issues with Mormon bishops.
I cannot articulate the deep devastation this has caused.

\#294 Name Hidden. CS: 4

20-ish years ago, in the seventh grade, I had a history teacher. He was
single, in his late 30s, and he was very interested in having kids come
swim at his house, the ones who got good grades. He had several
"hush-hush" parties of which he did not have permission from the school
administration. Just he and a couple of students, to reward the ones who
maybe got an "A," or ones who "showed big progress." What a nice guy,
and how fair!" I thought! He was going above and beyond his job to give
rewards to students. I thought he'd make a such good Mormon, Mormons are
just like that. So kind, so generous. Surely, he should take the
discussions. I could see how "improved" his life would be; maybe he
could meet a young Mormon woman and get married in the temple.

I saw absolutely nothing wrong, no red flags at all, because I was used
to being alone with an older man- a nice, caring, middle-aged man who
asked deeply personal questions one-on-one with me a couple of times per
year. This was very normal to me. How protected I felt, knowing I could
talk one on one with not only my teachers, but my bishop, who was called
of God, and his counselors as well. The world felt so safe, and Heavenly
Father had blessed me in every possible way, was my thought.

A plot twist occurred here though. It was soon discovered that my bishop
was having an affair with a ward member. The one who was a judge over
me, who could question my chastity and "worthiness" was the one
committing adultery, and had been for an entire year. I thought he was
so righteous, a true man of God, and infallible. He was a bishop! How
could this happen? This was a reality check for me as I suddenly
recognized the very human tendencies of even "righteous" priesthood
holders, even the most elect. The ones I am supposed to follow and to
whom I should confess and discuss personal sins.

A few years later, the history teacher was arrested for several counts
of sexual abuse of minors.

I am so fortunate that the abuse did not happen to me, but it terrifies
me to think how close I came to subjecting myself to this because I saw
no danger in the situation. I was perfectly willing to put myself in a
completely abusive situation because of my own Mormon culture. There was
actual danger all around me, and I could not see or discern the danger.

Where the rest of the world insists now that children/minors are never
alone one-on-one with an adult---whether they be a professional teacher,
coach, or physician---our church lags behind, and I believe all efforts
should be made to stop one-on-one situations from occurring between
minors and adults.

Trigger: sexual abuse

\#278 Carrie B. CS: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8

I grew up in an abusive home. I was raped for the first time when I was
7. I spent decades trying to convince my "leaders" that it wasn't my
fault. They insisted that I must have done something and I needed to
repent (after all, what's the point of a worthiness interview if you
don't get to spread some shame?). All the shaming just made me more
vulnerable to the abuse. They could have helped me. They could have
helped my abuser. Instead they dealt lasting damage to my sense of self
and my sense of worth. I couldn't get away from the abuse and the abuser
until after my kids had also been damaged. We are now dealing with the
4th major mental health crisis to hit our family of 6. My daughter is in
the hospital and has been for 3 months with no end in sight. It didn't
have to be this way.

\#276 Name Hidden. CS: 1,3

The first time I ever masturbated was on my Mission at age 21. I knew I
had to confess to my mission president, but I sat there in silence for
what seemed like a few minutes unable so speak. Finally, I blurted it
out. My Mission President responded with, Do you think that is why you
are not baptizing?

We were teaching more lessons then just about any mission companionship,
activating several families in a newly split area and that was the
response I got. A guilt trip. Stop asking inappropriate questions and
using shame/guilt.

\#46 Dave S. CS: 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,10

I've lived with decades of shame, guilt and anxiety due to dozens of
private worthiness meetings with LDS leaders when I was as young as
eleven years old. The questions were always sexually-based and
completely inappropriate. As a father and now a grandfather, I cannot
fathom how this perverted system still exists. There is no doubt that
millions of children have and continue to be emotionally harmed by this
cruel and bizarre practice. IT NEEDS TO END.

Trigger: sex abuse

\#86 Name Hidden. CS: 1,3,4. Other: Renewed shame and memories of past
sexual molestation. She felt like she was molested again.

This is a story of two of my daughters who were interviewed by the same
Bishop. One daughter was asked if she masturbated and what objects she
used. This daughter was adopted and was abused by men as a young girl.
She felt molested emotionally by the Bishop. This was traumatizing for
her and turned her off to the Church.

Another daughter had been molested as a five year old in the church by a
fifteen year old boy scout. The Bishop asked her details about her
sexual relationship with her boyfriend. She felt the energy coming from
the Bishop was molesting as well and brought up the past trauma of her
molestation in the Church building. This was very traumatizing and lived
with her for a long time. She still brings it up.

Both daughters are out of the Church. Not solely because of this
experience but it definitely played a part.

Trigger: sexual assault, victim blaming

\#81 Name Hidden. CS: 1,3

Not sure if it matters because it happened when I was an adult. After I
had finally told my parents that I had been raped they convinced me to
go to the bishop to hopefully get a recommendation to a counselor
through the church. I did get the recommendation, but was also told I
needed to atone for my sins for what had transpired. I left the bishop's
office sobbing.

Trigger: sex abuse

\#80 Name Hidden. CS: 5

I wish I could share the details but the victims don't want to go
public. A man I loved and trusted as much as my own dad was a Bishop
while he was molesting his own children. There is no question about
this, he admitted to it when he was confronted. Who knows how many other
children he abused behind closed doors. If you think a Bishop has some
kind of special angel trust power, think again. Don't trust anybody at
church with your kids behind closed doors.

\#127 Name Hidden. CS: 4,6

I have a child currently at BYU-I. The bishop there has asked several
students how often they plan to have sex after marriage (including our
child). The bishop then proceeds to explain that it isn't as often as
the student thinks because of things like pregnancy and menstrual
cycles. We know of at least 3 students this has happened to, young men
and young women. This is a sitting bishop. It has caused a huge amount
of pain and frustration and even questioning of our faith in our very
active LDS home.

I fail to see how a \~50 year old man asking a 19 year old girl how
often she plans to have sex once she's married and the giving advice on
the effect of menstruation on that frequency has ANY place in our church
or ecclesiastical leadership.

Trigger: suicide

\#169 Brian B. CS: Suicide of my Son.

I did lose a 14 year old son to suicide in 2014, this petition is
correct about the risk of suicide attached to these interviews.

In my most painful moments searching for what sparked my Samuel's end of
life decision, the issues presented in this petition quickly rose high
on the list to investigate. Not just one, but two Bishop's testified
while speaking at his funeral just how conscientious Samuel was during
his Bishop's interviews with them. Also comments in his chat logs before
he died hint that he was effected by these interviews.

After over 3 years of grueling and intense research and pondering to
understand, I place these interviews and the feelings of shame they
produce as a major reason for his end of life decision. My haunting
regrets tell me he might still be alive if I had not required that he
participate in these interviews, God knows how I wished I had a Sam
Young to enlighten me before his death.

\#184 Name Hidden. CS: 1,2,4,6. Other: Fear of sex, gynecological exams,
etc

I remember having to decide whether to confess to masturbation at my
baptismal interview a few months shy of my eighth birthday.

I decided to confess, since it was what god wanted, but chickened out
when I was actually sitting in a room alone, across a heavy desk from my
childhood bully's dad, in my white "baptism dress."

I went through with the baptism without telling anybody about the
terrible sin I was carrying around, and promised god in prayer that I
would stay clean and never do it again. Although eight-year-olds \*are\*
champions of self restraint, I didn't make it two weeks.

Guilt followed me through the next decade as I told myself that each
interview would be the one where I would finally confess, and then
failed as I sat across that desk from a parade of balding strangers.

As a Mormon girl, I felt like a profoundly broken person for having this
"habit" (see: human need) at all, much less not being able to kick it.

Once I started having sex, I physically couldn't do penetration because
I would freeze up so badly (a condition called vaginismus). While my
partner and I were able to overcome that, I still cry at every
gynecological exam. And maybe worst of all, I didn't ever think any of
this was wrong until well into adulthood.

Trigger: sexually explicit questioning, slut-shaming, suicide

\#229 Sara F. CS: 1,2,3,7,8,9

When I was 17 I slipped with my older boyfriend. I told my parents what
had happened and they told me it was bad enough I needed to confess to
the bishop. I'd never had an issue talking to a bishop before because
luckily my mom and I were close enough she told me when it was ok not to
confess to something or just say yes or no to get through a childhood
interview. So I knew this time would be different.

I never did find out if I'd be in trouble because after my confession,
instead of hearing comfort and what I needed to do to repent, the
questions began. "Did he go over or under the clothes" did he insert
fingers?" Would you have liked him to use his fingers?" Do you ever use
you fingers when alone?" Ew, no no no! Finally in tears I told him I was
feeling disgusting and to please stop those types of questions he said
"do you know why you're crying? Because you've realized you're a slut.
Does anyone respect sluts? Will anyone marry a slut?" I got up against
his protests and left.

But it didn't end there. This bishop has both a daughter and a niece my
age \[who\] went to my school. I noticed people talking about me and
laughing as I passed. My friend came up to me and said "you really
shouldn't tell your bishop things anymore" when I asked why, she told me
that his daughter and niece were telling everyone that at \[an\] Easter
get together he had told everyone about what I'd said, in confidence, in
his office! He didn't keep it quiet like he was supposed to! The
bullying over being called a slut and whore at school thanks to this
bishop made me feel I could never face these people again and his words
"who would marry a slut" kept repeating over and over and over in my
head. All because I came close to going all the way with my boyfriend
but we were smart and stopped before it got to that.

I went home and took 20 pain killers, 30 sleeping pills, slit my wrists
and waited in the bathtub. I couldn't go to school and I was never
gettting married now. My parents knew and thought I was headed in the
wrong direction and kept forcing the idea of more meetings with the
bishop on me. I wasn't going back to that man just to watch him
gleefully ask for details, and hear "slut" again. When I told our stake
president he said I was a liar. So no one was on my side. I \[had\] just
been through what, for an LDS teenager\[,\] is one of the worst things
ever, mad parents, told I'm never getting married, a bishop who can't be
trusted, a school full of people who kept calling me a slut, and no one
to support me. Luckily my mom found me in time and the ER dr.s were able
to get the pills out of my system and the bleeding to stop and I
finished up my junior and senior years of high school through BYUs
distance learning program and i was allowed to go inactive until we had
a new bishop. But first time I went to church 3 years later I had an
anxiety attack and had to leave sobbing. I have never been in a bishops
interview since. I chose not to get married in the temple to avoid a
worthiness interview. That one bishop changed the whole course of my
young adult life.

Trigger: Sexual assault, suicide

\#233 Austin B. CS: 1,3,6,7,8

I looked at pornography in high school. My dad got a confession out of
me by lying to me and saying that he would drive me to mutual but
instead drove into a dark alley. He pinned me in a corner and forced me
to confess. When I did confess to my bishop he told me I should avoid
all women including my mother and sister because I was prone to be a
rapist. In high school I got into a very toxic relationship with a girl
who ended up raping me. I told my bishop and he said since I was a male
that I liked it and I needed to repent. I was so depressed after this
and wanted to kill myself. I tried to kill myself once but my best
friend found me and saved me. I'm now married and my wife has slowly
started to help me work through some of the deep damage my mormon
experience has caused.

Final story. Trigger: abuse, sexual assault, slut-shaming, sexually
explicit questioning,

\#339 Name Hidden. CS: 1,2,3,4,7,8,9

I wish I was brave enough to post my name, but my family is still
unaware of my faith transition. I feel like a coward. My heart is
beating rapidly in nervousness as I type this out. But I need to do it.

I grew up in an extremely dysfunctional family. My dad was a highly
abusive narcissist and my mom just sat back and let it happen. I was
essentially a co-parent with my mom. I developed severe bulimia that I
nearly died from, along with severe OCD, depression and anxiety that
would follow me for years (still does) as a direct correlation to my
home and church life growing up.

I guess I would have called myself highly sexual from the time I hit
puberty (I now know, I was probably just a normal, curious teenager). My
first kiss was horrible. I had a boy two years older than me take me
into his room when I was thirteen, pin my hands above my head, pull my
shirt up, grope my breasts and begin yanking my pants down. Thankfully,
my friend walked in and it was stopped. I am absolutely unable to
explain the extreme guilt I felt. I was defiled. I didn't really even
understand at the time that I was taken advantage of, because the person
I told of the encounter, the bishop, just punished me. I was told not to
take the sacrament for several weeks and no temple recommend for me. I
had to describe in detail what had happened. I was so ashamed and my
anxiety was through the roof. This boy told everyone I had sex with him.
I lost every single one of my friends in seventh grade. I remember he
contacted me on messenger and said "you suck. You're such a dumb slut.
You told everyone we had sex." I was so confused and had nowhere to
turn.

Well, somehow this experience didn't deter my sexual feelings. I wanted
to feel desired by boys. I was so much taller and had developed much
sooner than other girls and I was just sort of weird. Since people were
calling me a slut anyway, I figured what I did didn't matter.

I was extremely bullied all through junior high and high school to the
extent of having many emails sent to me urging me to commit suicide
because I was "better off dead, slut."

I think I was pretty- though I didn't know it. I was thin, but thought I
was fat. My life at home was out of control and school was hell (enter
bulimia as a way to gain control). I went to nearly every bishop I had
pleading for help at home (I had a lot of bishops because my parents
couldn't ever afford housing so we moved a lot). My dad was so mean and
so abusive- "PLEASE help me," I begged. I got the same answers always-
honor my father's priesthood, I'm being dramatic, it can't be that bad,
because my mom stays.

Anyway, I had large breasts from the time I was 12. I was absolutely
unaware of the effect my body had on older men at the time. I didn't
know I was dressing "sexy". I wasn't trying to be sexy! I was just
trying to find something to wear while constantly growing and never
having money to buy new clothes. During my 12-17 year period, I had two
bishops. They both called me into their office monthly (not
exaggerating) commenting on how my outfits were "turning men on" and I
was "walking pornography". Well, I just thought that was disgusting and
not my problem. Additionally, my mom was always harping on me for
dressing immodestly. I responded the only way that made sense-
rebellion. Fine! If men were getting turned on- gross!!! Not my problem,
and I will continue to dress how I want.

In the meantime, I was hooking up (Mormon version-making out, hand stuff
for the most part) with any boy who would have me. I was disgusting and
ugly in my eyes, and if boys were turned on by me, though I couldn't
understand why, I would take advantage and hook up with them, if only to
feel wanted for a moment. I was in and out of the bishop's office
constantly. These two men questioned me incessantly every time I went in
with a new confession. I would be nauseous with anxiety every time I had
to see the bishop. I asked myself, WHAT was wrong with me that I
couldn't control myself? Why didn't I love god enough to stop committing
these sexual sins? These men would ask questions like:

-were your nipples erect? -did you orgasm? -how deep did his fingers go?
-did you enjoy yourself? -how long did your climax last? -did your
vagina get wet?

I have since found out both these bishops asked several of my same
friends in the ward the same questions. But these were well respected
and loved men- they were not wrong in my eyes, I was. I was told over
and over that every time I committed another sexual sin, all the other
sins were brought back on me. I am unable to explain the gravity of this
comment. I was driven insane thinking of how immoral I was. My OCD and
anxiety skyrocketed. I wanted to go to the lords house! I wanted to be
good! But how could I do that when boys really only desired me when I
used my body? I WANTED so desperately to be wanted.

Well, my boyfriend (now husband) and I ended up doing something really
"bad" about three weeks into dating. This was my first time at anything
like this. I knew I had crossed a line big time. I was SICK. We nearly
broke up. I had JUST gotten my recommend back from a previous repentance
process!

So once again, I made an appointment with the bishop, absolutely
agonizing the days before my appointment over my grievous sin. The
bishop told me my boyfriend had to be addicted to porn- where else would
he get ideas like this? He said this is not husband material and
recommended I end the relationship; this type of man that desired such
sick, sexual things would surely grow up to be an abusive spouse and
father. I remember this next part so well. This huge, 400 pound man
leaned his head back, closed his eyes, and told me to describe in detail
what had happened, asking probing questions along the way. I felt sick,
but what could I do? This was gods representative- he knows what is
necessary for me to be forgiven. (My husband is the best man and
anything but abusive- I'm thankful I didn't take the advice of my
bishop).

Fast forward to when I am 21 and my husband is on his mission. I was at
a party and someone spiked my drink. My friends described hearing crying
and screaming from the upstairs room I was in. I deduced from this, and
from the fluids on my dress, that I had been raped. I was devastated
because how would my RM husband ever want me again?

This time, with a new bishop, I once again went in to repent. It
honestly did not even occur to me that I didn't need to repent because
it had not been my fault. Once again, I was told that this may not had
happened if I was being faithful to my missionary and dressed modestly.
My heart was broken.

I can't blame the church for my OCD and other issues. However, I CAN and
will say they were ABSOLUTELY exacerbated by the policies of the church.
I now know that in NO WAY is your worth attached to your sexuality- it
just does not work this way. The teachinsg within the church regarding
sexuality are harmful to every man and woman or child of any age.

I am not "out" to either side of my family about where I stand with the
Church- the idea of what will happen when I tell them I no longer
believe sparks too much anxiety. Thankfully, my husband wants to stay
with me even though he believes.

These practices are HARMFUL and they do NO GOOD. The simple answer is no
more interviews. I wish the church would drop their obsession with
sexuality, but I know that won't happen, so let's at least protect our
members, our children and STOP these interviews. A child does not need
to think that they are any less of a person because they have sexual
desires.

Yes, it may be "rare" that you have an actual story of physical abuse
behind the door, but I am here to tell you that abuse doesn't have to be
physical! It can be mental- I believe what I suffered at the hands of
bishops is abuse- and any of my non Mormon therapists will attest to
that.

The LDS church should not be allowed to perpetuate this myth that they
think family is the most important thing; they don't think that. If they
did, these interviews would have already stopped rather than receiving
pushback from the church, and I'm sure this will result in the
excommunication of Sam Young- what a travesty. If the church believed in
families, they wouldn't care if gays marry or if one race marries
another- they would be happy more love is being created in the world. If
they cared about families, they would make women feel equal to men,
instead of having women give themselves to husbands in the temple.
Please LDS business corporation, stop these interviews and do the right
thing, for once.

In the intro I said these stories matter. We need to understand that
we're making history. A lot of history is taken from first-hand accounts
in addition to verifiable documentation. First-person experiences put
history into context for us, a crucial piece to construction historical
models. The extent of uprisings in early Mormonism will truly never be
known because of how little documentation we have of the period. Court
hearings in the early church involved a single entry in "History of the
Church" as (Held council for elder \_\_\_\_\_ who is led into error)
because the history of the Church has been written by the victor. The
number of first-person experiences this campaign has collected is how
history is truly created. Those of us who study history can often become
disconnected with the story of the people who experience history in our
never-ending pursuit of seeing big-picture concepts. One thing we can't
lose sight of is the need to give these accounts the weight they
deserve, and unfortunately they don't carry as much weight as
depositions and legal affidavits, but all these allegations of physical,
mental, and emotional damage caused due to Bishop's interviews all
provide data and put the modern history of the church into context by
adding that crucial human element. Legal cases are built upon
allegations and the more of these data points we collect, the stronger
the case becomes that the Church currently uses Bishop's interviews to
inflict pain, suffering, social, and emotional abuse on its members who
are simply trying to be the most righteous and stalwart Mormons they're
capable of.

Let's take a step back and appreciate something for a second. Look what
the internet has done to the church. With such rapid access to
information and the ability to tap into hundreds of stories from all
across the globe in a matter of seconds. Any idea how hard it was to
collect or consume that amount of information even 20 years ago, let
alone 180 years ago when the Church was in its infancy? This campaign to
Protect LDS Children and the stories it's generating are vital to
historians of the future. When historians in 100 years look back on the
early 21^st^ century, they'll see how much these campaigns which arose
solely out of the internet, have had on our society. We're in the middle
of writing history. The fact of the matter is, every tweet, every email,
every court case which hits headlines, every single one of these
interactions write history in some way. We're lucky to live at a time
when a conflict arising in Mormonism isn't swept under the historical
rug; instead, we can see the people this impacts and hear their stories
first-hand. We can appreciate the pain and suffering, and all the
psychological damage these interviews cause by witnessing all this
information aggregate with a grass-roots movement just like Protect LDS
Children, Mormon Stories, and Ordain Women.

That's why these stories matter. No longer is Mormon history what the
Church wants it to be. Instead, it's the members and the outside world
who're actively constructing the historical models that our modern time
will be viewed through by future historians. We have a duty to Protect
members of the church, children, adults, practicing members, cafeteria
or Jack Mormons, and ex-Mormons alike all need to understand what has
happened to us and deal with the psychological turmoil caused by these
policies.

And no single person or body of people are at fault here. I know we want
to pin the blame for abuse on somebody and ex-Mormons will be quick to
point the finger at the Q15, but the problem is that those 15 men are
victims of the same self-perpetuating cycle which has hurt millions of
people so far. They're no more at fault than their forefathers for
conforming to this damaging system. The hardest part about dealing with
sex as a controlling mechanism is that throwing blame may make us feel
better, but it doesn't get us anywhere. Arguably, blaming somebody or a
group of somebodys is counterproductive to moving forward.

If the Church is smart, they'll take this movement with grace and on
Saturday Morning, they'll take the stand at General Conference and issue
a public statement addressing the concerns of Sam Young's campaign. They
can turn this into a positive. They can stand at the pulpit and tell the
26,000 Mormons in attendance that they're intent on listening to the
concerns of their members. The issue of sexually explicit Bishop's
interviews has recently come to their attention and they have decided to
respond to these concerns by agreeing to the two criteria of the
campaign. Bishop's interviews, from now on, will be conducted with more
than one adult in the room, and questions about chastity and sexuality
will be removed from this time forward.

The Church is bleeding members right now and I think it could largely be
due to how little say Mormons feel like they have in their Church. The
leadership is disconnected and insulated from the will of the people.
What better way to restore faith and goodwill in the fragile
relationship the leadership has with its members than by making a
systematic change based on a public petition with more than 15,000
signatures?

Unfortunately for us all, that seems like a pipe-dream. I don't know how
this will play out in the coming months, none of us do. But, if history
is any indicator of future events... the battle has only just begun.
