---
layout: post
title: Ep 101 - For the Relief of Nauvoo Society plus Kate Kelly
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-101-relief-nauvoo-society-plus-kate-kelly/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-101-for-the-relief-of-nauvoo-society-plus-kate-kelly
category: History
date: 2018-05-04 03:24:52 +0000
---

Ep 101 -- For the Relief of Nauvoo Society plus Kate Kelly

On this episode, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo is finally
established. We walk through the set and setting of Nauvoo in early 1842
being built on nothing more than credit. Men are the providers, while
women are tasked with home chores, raising children, and maybe doing a
small money-making hobby on the side to keep the house afloat. We
discuss women's roles in 19^th^-century America and how early feminism
caused small movements to rise long before the official beginning of the
Women's Era. We read through the meeting minutes of the foundation of
the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo when Emma Hale Smith was elected
President. We speculate on Joseph's intentions when it was first
organized and opine on how stagnant and solidified Mormon doctrine today
is in comparison to Nauvoo Mormonism of 1842. What does it take to
change Mormon doctrine today? We invite on Kate Kelly to discuss her
history with the Ordain Women movement.

Links:

Relief Society minute book\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#ft-historical-intro>

History of Relief Society\
<http://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Relief_Society>

Joseph Smith Journal May 1842\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1841-december-1842/25#source-note>

Ordain Women into priesthood\
<https://ordainwomen.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/34WomenandPriesthoodQuotes.pdf>

Masonic Adoption rite\
<http://www.masonicdictionary.com/adoptive.html>

Mormon Law of Adoption\
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/law-adoption-one-phase-development-mormon-concept-salvation-1830-1900>

Emmeline B. Wells A Voice for Mormon Women by Carol Cornwall Madsen\
<https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1R_F9XDNepwuxB_KJUeuTmy895QDNqPtx>

Women in Masonry\
<http://www.masonicinfo.com/women.htm>

History of Women's Freemasonry\
<http://womenfreemasonusa.com/history.html>

Order of the Eastern Star Robert Morris 1850\
<https://repository.library.brown.edu/studio/item/bdr:411520/>

Kate Kelly\
<http://www.katekellyesq.com/>

The Fern Foundation Short Creek Service Project

<http://thefernfoundation.org/donate>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The Rosary of the Eastern Star: SYNOPSIS OF THE SYSTEM

Here is a story of the grand, old time,

A tale of virtues, tender, yet sublime,

Inscribed on sacred page to give us faith

In woman's constancy, in life and death;

Here in God's book, the bright narration see,

And five brave hearts make up the history.

Adah, great Jephthah's daughter, soul of truth,

Ruth, flower of Moab, humble, pious Ruth,

Esther, the Crowned, and worthiest of a crown,

Martha, His friend, whom saints and angels own,

Electa, strong the martyr's cross to bear---

These are the Heroines of the Eastern Star.

Fairest among ten thousand deathless names,

How altogether lovely do they glow!

Time's annals yield no brighter, nobler themes,

No purer hearts the ranks of heaven know;

Here then, oh Sisters, sister-virtues trace,

And light from these your lamps of truth and grace.

Intro

Nauvoo, Illinois, early 1842 was beginning to look like a real city.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of man-hours for little or no
pay, a constant influx of immigrant European Mormons making their way
into the burgeoning city all coalesced to exhibit what humans can
accomplish when they collectively devote their minds and all their
energy to one cause. What used to be a swamp on the Mississippi, now
hundreds of homes, dozens of small businesses, a schoolhouse, a
community gathering hall, a Masonic lodge, a red-brick store, a mansion,
a couple small church buildings, a small armory for the Nauvoo Legion,
and half a dozen major buildings at varying degrees of construction
covered the landscape.

This city didn't crop up out of nowhere and all the necessary supporting
infrastructure worked constantly behind the scenes to ensure a smooth
and endless stream of construction could continue unobstructed. Logging
operations had cleared every standing tree within miles and were
venturing further and further for want of solid lumber. Steam-powered
mills were refining raw wood to usable boards, 2 brickyards with massive
kilns had a constant wagon train of clay coming in trying to fill the
backlog of millions of needed bricks. Market areas were springing up on
every corner for everything a person would need for planting this year's
crops.

From an outsider's perspective, a person could travel into Nauvoo, spend
a few days seeing the beauty of the city, patronize the local shops and
tavern, and leave with an incredibly positive experience. Day-to-day
life in Nauvoo for those living there, was not what the public outlook
revealed. While the streets may look clean and pleasant, laid out in
proper blocks hearkening to the Masonic genesis of the city, the people
living in Nauvoo knew that the façade hid a darker side of Nauvoo no
outsider could understand.

Nauvoo was purchased on credit, built on credit, and only functioned due
to a constant stream of investors who chose to ignore Joseph Smith's
sordid past with his creditors. The city wasn't built organically with
first some farmers cultivating the area, then a small trading area, then
manufacturing and industry slowly making its way in; the Mormons had
brute-forced the city into existence against all odds.

This flash-in-the-pan way of building Nauvoo left a lot to be desired.
Chief of all concerns, there weren't any jobs. There was farming to be
done, but way too many people and far too little land to employ
everybody as a farmer. There were a few menial manufacturing jobs in
small textile and mercantile industries, but there weren't any major
factories utilizing Nauvoo's prime location on the Mississippi for
shipping purposes as large factories require years and insane amounts of
venture capital to get off the ground. Any goods the Mormons were making
cost too much and weren't produced at a high enough volume to offset the
costs, forcing the asking price to be above local and national
competitors for any given good. The only industry with any jobs was
construction, but the pay was terrible because, once again, everything
was being built on credit and Nauvoo had no major exports to bring in
capital to invest. Nauvoo was a negative feedback loop and ledger books
were being filled with more red ink every day.

Now consider the general structure of society in these hard times. The
men were understood to be the breadwinners of the home and provide for
their family, while the women were to remain homemakers tending to all
necessary chores to keep the household running and raise the children
with good Christian values. Women rarely held any job beyond what they
could do while at home. Dressmaking, rug painting, sewing, basket
weaving, making sweets, teaching children to read and write, the options
were extremely limited in comparison to their male counterparts. All
these money-making ventures could NEVER interfere with homemaking. We
think doing laundry and dishes sucks today, imagine doing so without
running water and only a washing board for a family of 10.

With the men devoting so much of their time to church business and
construction, women provided relief in the form of home-cooked meals,
caring for the kids, making clothing, and doing all necessary tasks to
keep the home running when the men were working for 15 hours a day on
the temple, Nauvoo House, farming, or any other business created by the
Church.

Men provided, women were tasked with spiritual guidance and
child-rearing. Women couldn't vote. Women couldn't own property or even
start a business for that matter, with a few minor exceptions. Women
could take over or inherit a business started by a man, but that was
just about it, and their boards of directors were almost without
excepted comprised solely of men. Women couldn't write legally binding
wills, sign contracts, or negotiate wages. If women wanted a voice in
politics or business, they influenced it by raising good sons with
proper ideals to accomplish their will. A Woman's power in
19^th^-century America was exerted through the men by whom she was
surrounded. It wasn't until the 1890s that the dawn of the women's era
finally arrived, but it was, and still is, a long road ahead.

To look back even further, 1647 in this country was the first American
woman to demand the right to vote. It wasn't until 1869, that's 31 years
ahead of our timeline, that the first woman was admitted to the bar. It
would be 1916 before the first woman was elected to Congress. It wasn't
until 1872 that the first woman ran for President of the United States.
That's 16 years shy of a century after the Constitution was ratified.
Are we supposed to believe that there wasn't a single woman capable of
being a great President before 1872? There still hasn't been one?

One of the signature revelations which distinguishes Mormonism apart
from its Protestant counterparts is the Word of Wisdom in the modern D&C
89. We've discussed this before on My Book of Mormon podcast and back on
episode 28 -- Battle for Zion, of Naked Mormonism. There's a story
behind the Word of Wisdom which is merely eluded to in the introduction
of the revelation as follows:

"Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio,
February, 27, 1833. As a consequence of the early brethren using tobacco
in their meetings, the Prophet was led to ponder upon the matter;
consequently, he inquired of the Lord concerning it. This revelation,
known as the Word of Wisdom, was the result."

The story behind this revelation coming to be is actually Emma Hale
Smith, Jo's first wife and the 'elect lady' of Mormonism. She was sick
of cleaning up the tobacco spit from the brethren and asked Jo to talk
to the Lord about it. The Word of Wisdom, banning Mormons from drinking
hot drinks, smoking, and only allowing them to eat meat sparingly in
times of famine, came into existence. This example perfectly exhibits a
microcosm of the role women played in society. Their will influenced
society based on the social standing of their husbands. The fact that
even the modern D&C doesn't acknowledge Emma's influence on the prophet
pondering the health effects of tobacco shows just how little power
women wielded in the Church throughout its history. Given how much
progress society has made since 1842, this discrepancy seems even more
glaring today.

Emmeline B. Wells is one of the most quotable women in the early Mormon
movement. A champion of women's rights and a prominent suffragist, as
editor of the Relief Society's Women's Exponent, her wit was
particularly sharp and her pen was her weapon of choice.

In the 1981 edition of the John Whitmer Historical Journal, there's an
article on the life and times of Emmeline B. Wells written by Carol
Cornwall Madsen, I'll be quoting extensively from it when Madsen quotes
Wells.

"A man too often saw his wife as simply a necessity in his
establishment, to manage his house, to cook his dinner, to attend to his
wardrobe, always on hand if she is wanted and always out of sight when
not needed. He doesn't mind kissing her occasionally, when it suits him;
but he never thinks she has any thoughts of her own, any ideas which
might be developed; she must not have even an opinion, or if she has she
mustn't express it, it is entirely out of place; she is a subject, not a
joint-partner in the domestic firm."

"Why is it not possible for man and woman to love each other truly, and
dwell together in harmony, each according to the other all the freedom
of thought, feeling, and expression they would grant to one who was not
bound to them by indissoluble ties?"

There's a common criticism leveled against feminists that they attempt
to denigrate men's position or opinions in lieu of elevating their
position above men's. While some of those feminists may exist out there,
the broad consensus of feminism seems to be an overall equality of men
and women in all aspects of society. We can discuss what that equality
looks like and the physiological differences between men and women and
how those differences may impact the paths men and women choose to lead.
However, that's a separate discussion. Emmeline Wells summarized the
position of equalism extremely well when she said this in the October
1897 edition of the Woman's Exponent:

"Women are not asking for their rights simply because of 'place or
power,' or to crowd men out of the ranks of the wage earners or
professions, but that they may be acknowledged as being an equal in the
work and business of the great world in which all must live and take
part... This great work can never be done well by one half of the human
family; it is the opinion of all who think deeply that men and women
must do the work together, and unitedly."

Another powerful voice in the woman's movement in Nauvoo history was
truly one of the most unique and peculiar of women Joseph would take as
a plural wife, Eliza R. Snow. She wrote extensively on the path and
plight of women in mid-19^th^-century America. Hit it Brian.

92 One of Time's Changes by Eliza Roxcy Snow

Some things have chang'd from what they were\
When all the fairest of the fair;\
Whom Fame has rank'd among the 'beauties';\
Were skillful in domestic duties.

Our modern Misses scarce believe 5\
That ladies us'd to spin and weave:\
Or, that gay Princesses, of yore,\
Wrought the rich garments, Princes wore.

Since Fashion has with Folly met,\
The stars of Industry have set--- 10\
Pleasure and Profit have disbanded,\
And Labor, like grim Want, is branded.

'Tis strange as foolish, but 'tis got so\
Who are not idle, would be thought so;\
And ladies too, have grown so common, 15\
No wonder if they plunder Mammon!

Now who, beneath proud Fashion's peal,\
Will dare draw music from the wheel,\
Or regulate the kitchen, when\
Eliza stops, to wield the pen?

published in *Times and Seasons,* 1 March 1842

Various points can be charted throughout American history that could be
labeled as the proto-feminist movement. It seems that the complaints the
feminist movement attempts to address have existed in some form or
another for centuries and trying to claim feminism started at a specific
arbitrary time is an exercise in futility. We can point to the suffrage
movement and say that's the earliest iteration of feminism, but look
back a few more decades and we have women gaining the power to vote in
territories before states. A few decades before women could vote in
these territories there were powerful feminist women getting doctorate
degrees and professions previously reserved for just men and influencing
local politics with organized marches without being able to vote on
those politics. A few decades before that we have our first female
ministers of various religions. Some historians have theorized that the
Salem Witch trials evolved out of a misplaced sense of trying to quash
an early feminist movement.

The ideas that women have less opportunities and their general position
in society is inferior to that of a man's position, generally speaking
of course, has been around since the beginning of this country in some
form or another. The mid-1800s is merely one point on the upward
trajectory of women's rights.

The beginning poem was from the Order of the Eastern Star, which was
essentially a women's Masonic lodge founded in 1850. Established as a
para-Masonic society open to Masons and their wives, the Order of the
Eastern Star was founded by a guy named Robert Morris and the society
was readily accepted by multiple Masonic lodges who offered their
facilities for Eastern Star meetings. The Order of the Eastern Star had
five different degrees and practiced what was known as the rite of
adoption.

To be painfully brief, the adoption system came from France as a
practice appended to Masonry and was also practiced in some Scottish
rites. This adoption system was essentially set out to bring women who
were tied to Masons into the rite. From masonicdictionary.com:

"The objects of this Rite, as expressed by the framer, were \"to
associate in one common bond the worthy wives, widows, daughters, and
sisters of Freemasons, so as to make their adoptive privileges available
for all the purposes contemplated in Freemasonry; to secure to them the
advantages of their claim in a moral, social, and charitable point of
view, and from them the performance of corresponding duties.\" Hence, no
females but those holding the above recited relations to Freemasons were
eligible for admission."

Basically, if your husband, father, or deceased husband was a Mason,
this rite of adoption allowed you to essentially be qualified as a
Mason. The Order of the Eastern Star used this same adoption rite and
created androgynous ascendancy rituals so as not to discriminate against
women who wanted to be part of the fraternity at some level, even if
membership was only in the Eastern Star as opposed to the Royal Arch.

Like so many of these feminist, or equalist, movements, the foundation
of the Order of the Eastern Star doesn't mark the beginning of the ideas
behind its foundation. The actual foundation of the group was a
milestone along a much broader trajectory. The ideas that women should
be equal in societies such as Masonry existed long before the Order of
the Eastern Star was founded.

Joseph Smith listened to his constituents and their concerns as their
representative to the Lord on this earth. Jo captured the sentiments of
mid-19^th^-century feminism when he established the Relief Society on 17
March, 1842.

Vogel HoC 4:534:

"I assisted in commencing the organization of "The Female Relief Society
of Nauvoo: in the Lodge Room. Sister Emma Smith, President, and Sisters
Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland, Counselors. I gave much
instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and
Covenants, concerning the Elect Lady, and showed that elect meant to be
elected to a certain work, &c., and that the revelation was then
fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society,
she having previously been ordained to expound the Scriptures. Emma was
blessed, and her counselors were ordained by Elder John Taylor."

The actual minutes for the first meeting of the society provide much
more insight into the meeting and the reasoning behind organizing it.
The meeting minutes in their entirety can be found on
JosephSmithPapers.org where they provide a wonderfully informative
introduction to provide historical context. You'll find a link in the
show notes.

"On 17 March 1842, JS first formally organized Latter-day Saint women in
a group with distinct responsibilities and authority. At JS's
invitation, twenty women assembled in the large room above his dry goods
store
in [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3878693934150711365),
Illinois, to be organized, as one woman recalled his description, "under
the priesthood after the pattern of the priesthood" (Sarah M. Kimball,
"Auto-biography," Woman's Exponent, 1 Sept. 1883, 51). Priesthood
quorums---units of men assembled according to priesthood office and
usually headed by a president and two counselors---had been organized
previously. The women assembled on 17 March elected JS's wife [Emma Hale
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#8935907421459530927) president,
and she selected two counselors; a member of the Quorum of the Twelve
Apostles ordained or set apart the three-member presidency to their new
callings or offices. These were the first ecclesiastical positions in
the church for women.

The name the women selected for their institution, the Female Relief
Society of Nauvoo, paralleled that of contemporaneous women's benevolent
societies in the [United
States](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#6192500989406254240).
Two or three weeks prior to the 17 March meeting, a group
of [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#1928813778897849029) women
had met to form a "ladies society" to sew shirts for temple workmen, an
effort probably informed by the broader benevolent movement. When JS
invited these women to be organized as part of the church structure,
they abandoned their plans for an independent society with a
constitution and bylaws. JS told them at the initial meeting, "The
minutes of your meetings will be precedents for you to act upon---your
Constitution and law" (Minutes, 17 Mar. 1842). This record of Relief
Society "organization and proceedings" includes minutes for seventeen
meetings in 1842, thirteen in 1843, and four in 1844. By the last
recorded meeting in March 1844, a total of 1,331 women had enrolled as
members, most of them joining the first year (Maureen C. Ward, "'This
Institution Is a Good One': The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, 17
March 1842 to 16 March 1844," Mormon Historical Studies 3 \[Fall 2002\]:
87--203).

JS attended nine Relief Society meetings in 1842 and addressed six of
them. These minutes document his instructions regarding women's new
responsibilities, authority, and forthcoming temple blessings---the only
record of teachings JS directed specifically to women. The minutes
detail donations for and visits with the poor, contributions
for [temple](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#11341179221322054281)construction,
and women's efforts at moral reform and civic activism. Discussions
reported in this record refer explicitly or implicitly to tensions
mounting in Nauvoo over JS's political influence and threatened
extradition
to [Missouri](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#5912571284623504234),
the defection of prominent church and civic leader [John C.
Bennett](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7151330552022430436),
and the tumult surrounding the introduction of plural marriage. The
record of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo ends on 16 March 1844; a
decade passed before Relief Society meetings resumed in the Salt Lake
Valley."

The notebook begins with the cover where it says the following written
by first secretary, Eliza R. Snow:

"A

Book of Records.

Containing

the proceedings

of

The [Female Relief Society of ](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#11012098679818665255)[Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13902002339492012576).

The following appropriate frontispiece, was found lying on an open
Bible, in the room appropriated for the Society; at its first meeting.

"O, Lord! help our widows, and fatherless children! So mote it be. Amen.
With the sword, and the word of truth, defend thou them. So mote it be.
Amen."

This Book,

was politely presented to the Society by

[Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#16013720509864311961) [W\[illard\]
Richards](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#11361368285416230528);

on the 17th of March, AD. 1842."

The actual meeting itself is oddly entertaining. Jo, John Taylor, and
White-out Willard Richards were in attendance overseeing the meeting and
ordaining the various women to their respective offices. The women of
the group elected Emma Smith to be President of the society and then
deliberation ensues as to what the society shall be called. Consistent
with the historical context JosephSmithPapers provides, the general goal
of the society was to provide relief to those who were in need for
whatever may ail them. Whether it was need of medicine, clothing, a
place to stay in a dire situation, this female society was created to
relieve them of such stress and pressure. As with the Relief society
today, when the women see a problem in the Church worth addressing,
they're to report it to the brethren to be handled with the proper
authority. The purpose of the society and the naming of such was debated
as follows:

"Prest. Smith,
& [Elders](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7959126479760681059) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#4692051380847576733) & [Richards](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#1754688552834146653) return'd
and the meeting was address'd by Prest.Smith, to illustrate the object
of
the [Society](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#898010660983483603)---
that the Society of Sisters might provoke the brethren to good works in
looking to the wants of the poor--- searching after objects of charity,
and in administering to their wants--- to assist; by correcting the
morals and strengthening the virtues of the female community, and save
the Elders the trouble of rebuking; that they may give their time to
other duties &c. in their public teaching.

Prest. Smith further remark'd that an organization to show them how to
go to work would be sufficient. He propos'd that the Sisters elect a
presiding officer to preside over them, and let that presiding officer
choose two Counsellors to assist in the duties of her Office--- that he
would [ordain](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3476734172450687538) them
to preside over the Society--- and let them preside just as the
Presidency, preside over
the [church](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#18263110560632038771);
and if \[p. 7\] they need his instruction--- ask him, he will give it
from time to time.

Let this Presidency serve as a constitution--- all their decisions be
considered law; and acted upon as such.

If any Officers are wanted to carry out the designs of the Institution,
let them be appointed and set apart,
as [Deacons](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3535680877658128814), [Teachers](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3057909506452395110) &c.
are among us."

This is an interesting bit. This is Joseph Smith setting apart the
leadership of the Relief Society to act as a presiding body over the
women in the church the way the brethren preside over the rest of the
Church, even carving out offices for them equivalent to offices of
Teachers, Deacons, Priests, and Elders. The Relief society wields
significantly less power today than the initial intentions when it was
first created here in 1842. It's also worth bearing in mind, women in
the early Church conducted temple ceremonies and anointed and blessed
the sick causing them to be healed. These are duties largely reserved to
men in the Church today, seemingly a sharp discrepancy from Joseph
Smith's view of women's role in the Church when the Relief Society was
created. The Relief Society was also created as an instructor group to
teach women the tenets of the Gospel. Mormon women teaching women about
Mormonism, from curricula created by women for women. This shouldn't
need mentioning, but the Relief Society was truly revolutionary given
the societal norms of 19^th^-century America, especially when it came to
leadership in a Christian congregation.

"Mov'd by Prest. Smith, that [Mrs.
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3822523506328505522) proceed to
choose her Counsellors, that they may
be [ordain'd](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#881749530039849762) to preside
over this Society, in taking care of the poor--- administering to their
wants, and attending to the various affairs of this Institution.

The [Presidentess
Elect](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7324917902409605234),
then made choice of Mrs. [Sarah M.
Cleveland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#17625548921355588872) and
Mrs. [Elizabeth Ann
Whitney](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#15712823519544527028) for
Counsellors---

President Smith read the Revelation
to [Emma Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#11313464520647335770),
from the book of Doctrine and Covenants; and stated that she was
ordain'd at the time, the Revelation was given, to expound the
scriptures to all; and to teach the female part of community; and that
not she alone, but others, may attain to the same blessings.--- \[p.
8\]..."

[Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#16544345243758100117) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#4327597706707421239) then
set apart the counselors to the Elect Lady by laying on of hands.

"He then laid his hands on the head
of [Mrs. Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#9925546410355602094) and
blessed her, and confirm'd upon her all the blessings which have been
confer'd on her, that she might be a mother in Israel and look to the
wants of the needy, and be a pattern of virtue; and possess all the
qualifications necessary for her to stand and preside and dignify her
Office, to teach the females those principles requisite for their future
usefulness."

Jo then established the formula for how these Relief Society meetings
are to be conducted with motions being raised and voted on according to
unanimous consent. The way the Relief Society was established to operate
is indistinguishable from how the Presidency of the larger Church
operated.

"Prest. Smith proceeded to give counsel--- do not injure the character
of any one--- if members of the Society shall conduct improperly, deal
with them, and keep all your doings within your own bosoms, and hold all
characters sacred---

It was then propos'd
that [Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13310955204599009085) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7124468000982289900) vacate
the chair.

Prest. [Emma
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#16160983347552763624) and
her Counsellors took the chair, and

[Elder
Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#4585772949416523402) mov'd---
secd by Prest. J. Smith that we go into an investigation respecting what
this Society shall be call'd--- which was carried unanimously...

Mov'd by [Counsellor
Cleveland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14149956949465410119),
and secon'd by [Counsellor
Whitney](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#6342498560977637217),
that this Society be called The Nauvoo Female Relief Society.

[Elder
Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#16268926265824223503) offered
an amendment, that it be called The Nauvoo Female Benevolent Society
which would give a more definite and extended idea of the Institution---
that Relief be struck out and Benevolent inserted.

Prest. Smith offer'd instruction on votes--- \[p. 10\]

The motion was seconded by [Counsellor
Cleveland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#12516060791809266511) and
unanimously carried, on the amendment
by [Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#3976560728809080666) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13630969083196903941)."

Then, something remarkable happens. The Elect Lady, Emma Smith, motioned
that she would like to debate Elder John Taylor on the name of the
society and whether benevolence or relief is a better word to describe
the society.

"The [Prest.](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#402571436103682630) then
suggested that she would like an argument with [Elder
Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14757518345074167890) on
the words Relief and Benevolence.

Prest. J. Smith mov'd that the vote for amendment, be rescinded, which
was carried---

Motion for adjournment by [Elder
Richards](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#18388282794519090468) and
objected by Prest. J. Smith.---

Prest. J. Smith--- Benevolent is a popular term--- and the
term Relief is not known among popular Societies--- Relief is more
extended in its signification than Benevolent and might extend to the
liberation of the culprit--- and might be wrongly construed by our
enemies to say that
the [Society](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14398272531124818195) was to
relieve criminals from punishment &c. &c--- to relieve a murderer, which
would not be a benevolent act---

Prest. [Emma
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7141673756871384181),
said the popularity of the word benevolent is one great objection--- no
person can think of the word as associated with public Institutions,
without thinking of the Washingtonian Benevolent Society which was one
of the most corrupt Institutions of the day--- do not wish to have
it call'd after other Societies in the world---

Prest. J. Smith arose to state that he had no objection to the
word Relief--- that on question they ought to deliberate candidly and
investigate all subjects.

[Counsellor
Cleveland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#1227339435924366608) arose
to remark concerning the question before the house, that we should not
regard \[p. 11\] the idle speech of our enemies--- we design to act in
the name of the Lord--- to relieve the wants of the distressed, and do
all the good we can.---

[Eliza R.
Snow](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#6869114841726349627) arose
and said that she felt to concur with
the [President](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14213103644556936244),
with regard to the word Benevolent, that many Societies with which it
had been associated, were corrupt,--- that the popular Institutions of
the day should not be our guide--- that as daughters
of [Zion](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13062822093808162953),
we should set an example for all the world, rather than confine
ourselves to the course which had been heretofore pursued--- one
objection to the word Relief is, that the idea associated with it is
that of some great calamity--- that we intend appropriating on
some extraordinary occasions instead of meeting the
common occurrences---

Prest. [Emma
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#2115652906617436727) remark'd---
we are going to do something extraordinary--- when a boat is stuck on
the rapids with a multitude of Mormons on board we shall consider that a
loud call for relief--- we expect extraordinary occasions and pressing
calls---\"

Then, what must have seemed like an optimistic view of what the future
of the Relief Society held, another extraordinary occurrence ensued.

"[Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#5601045093521755817) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#9573550219529358559) arose
and said--- I shall have to concede the point--- your arguments are so
potent I cannot stand before them--- I shall have to give way---

Prest. J. S. said I also shall have to concede the point, all I shall
have to give to the poor, I shall give to
this [Society](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#2459796963141160765)---

[Counsellor
Whitney](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#2532097121893040221) mov'd,
that this Society be call'd The Nauvoo Female Relief Society---
second. by [Counsellor
Cleveland](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13359948055568089054)---

[E. R.
Snow](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#2305350009656782432) offer'd
an amendment by way of transposition of words, instead of The Nauvoo
Female Relief Society, it shall be call'd [The Female Relief Society of
Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#18167806305037545665)---
Seconded by Prest. J. Smith and carried--- \[p. 12\]

The previous question was then put--- Shall this Society be
call'd [The Female Relief Society
of Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#6886990360214394607)?---
carried unanimously.---

Prest. J. Smith--- I now declare this Society organiz'd with President
and Counsellors &c. according to Parliamentary usages--- and all who
shall hereafter be admitted into this Society must be free from
censure and receiv'd by vote---

Prest. J. Smith offered \$5.00 in gold piece to commence the funds of
the Institution."

Something else remarkable happened once the name of the society was
voted and unanimously accepted as the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.
President elect, Emma Smith, motioned to dismiss the men and carry on
the appointments as the women saw fit.

"Prest. [Emma
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#1186474372847580212) requested
that the gentlemen withdraw before they proceed to the choice of
Secretary and Treasurer, as was mov'd by Prest. J. Smith---

[Willard Richards.](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#16880043589731721664) Secty.

\[1 line blank\]

The gentlemen withdrew when it was Motioned and second. and unanimously
pass'd that [Eliza R.
Snow](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#5977002377883079889) be
appointed Secretary, and Phebe M. Wheeler, Assistant Secretary------

Motioned, second. and carried unanimly. that Elvira A. Coles be
appointed Treasurer---

Prest. [E.
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14708384432126070857) then
arose and proceeded to make appropriate remarks on the object of
the Society--- its duties to others also its relative duties to
each other Viz. to seek out and relieve the distressed--- that each
member should be ambitious to do good--- that the members should deal
frankly with each other--- to watch over the morals--- and be very
careful \<​of​\> the character and reputation--- of the members of the
Institution &c.

P. A. Hawkes--- Question--- What shall we reply to interrogatories
relative to the object of this Society?

Prest. [E.
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#1556603383833563098) replied---
for charitable purposes. \[p. 13\]...

Prest. [E.
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#15034890622037302607) said
that Mrs. Merrick is a widow--- is industrious--- performs her work
well, therefore recommend her to the patronage of such as wish to hire
needlework--- those who hire widows must be prompt to pay and inasmuch
as some have defrauded the laboring widow of her wages, we must
be upright and deal justly---...

[Elder
T.](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#12416193326375897853) then
arose and address'd the Society by saying that he is much gratified in
seeing a meeting of this
kind in [Nauvoo](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#14571783426307596661)---
his heart rejoices when he sees the most distinguished characters,
stepping forth in such a cause, which is calculated to bring into
exercise every virtue and give scope to the benevolent feelings of the
female heart--- he rejoices to see this Institution organiz'd according
to the law of Heaven--- according to a revelation previously given to
Mrs [E.
Smith](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#13272379511534347179) appointing
her to this important calling--- and to see all things moving forward in
such a glorious manner--- his prayer is that the blessings of God and
the peace of heaven may rest on this Institution henceforth------

The meeting then arose and was dismiss'd by prayer
by [Elder](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#837832574616415760) [Taylor](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#7534893327860675147).---"

In the March 30^th^ 1842 meeting, Joseph articulated what he envisioned
for the Relief Society in the Church as it continued to progress, grow,
and evolve.

"Said all difficulties which might & would cross our way must be
surmounted, though the sould be tried, the heart faint, and hands hang
down---must not retrace our steps---that there must be decision of
character aside from sympathy---that when instructed we must obey that
voice, observe the Constitution that the blessings of heaven may rest
down upon us---all must act in concert or nothing can be done---that the
Society should move according to the ancient Priesthood, hence there
should be a select Society separate from all the evils of the world,
choice, virtuous\[s\] and holy---Said he was going to make of this
Society a kingdom of priests as in Enoch's day---as in Pauls day---that
it is the privilege of each member to live long and enjoy health\--..."

Make of this society a kingdom of priests. He didn't say priestesses,
but it's what he meant. The Relief Society had a lot of powerful
real-world impacts in helping the poor and needy, and it evolved out of
the women working together in groups to make clothing for the men
spending so many hours working on the temple. It was created solely to
help the community and it seems from many of Jo's lectures concerning
the society that he had the idea that the Relief Society would
essentially be an equal arm of leadership in the Church of the women, to
give them voice, to allow them to make authoritative decisions, to
provide group-support for those in need, and most importantly, to bless
and heal the sick as so many women were incredibly proficient in doing.

Jo articulated as much a month after this meeting when the Relief
Society met again and he provided a lecture, from 28 April 1842 in
Joseph Smith's journal in the hand of William Clayton:

"Thursday 28 at Two o'clock after-noon met the members of the "Female
relief Society" and after presiding at the admission of many new
members. Gave a lecture on the pries\[t\]hood shewing how the sisters
would come in possession of the priviliges & blesings & gifts of the
priesthood\--& that the signs should follow them. Such as healing the
sick casting out devils &c. & that they might attain unto. These
blessings. By a virtuous life & conversation & diligence in keeping all
the commandments."

The first women's organization in the Mormon religion had finally been
created. It would continue on to have another 19 meetings in 1842, about
a dozen in 1843, and only 4 in the year of 1844. The dissolution of the
Relief Society coincides with the formation of the Council of Fifty just
a few months prior to the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. It
was another 2 decades before the Brighamite Church resurrected the
Relief Society in Utah.

Bloody Brigham Young sought the help of Eliza R. Snow to bring to life
again the Relief Society in Utah in 1868, and she was summarily elected
president of the General Relief Society. When a question was asked to
Eliza about the purpose of the Relief Society, she wrote the following:

"I would reply---to do good---to bring into requisition every capacity
we possess for doing good, not only in relieving the poor but in saving
souls."

The Utah Relief Society was powerful. It sent women to medical school,
trained nurses, opened the Deseret Hospital, operated cooperative
stores, promoted silk manufacture, saved wheat, and built granaries, and
it essentially created its own publication arm, the Woman's Exponent,
which was loosely affiliated with the Society but staffed with women who
were almost exclusively members.

When comparing the Utah Relief Society to that of Nauvoo, it seems clear
that one evolved out of the other and that the duties for the Utah
Society greatly expanded upon those of the Nauvoo Society.

Transitioning thought...

Let's step back and pull all these floating threads together. 1842 was a
ludicrously chaotic year for Mormonism and all those involved. As cited
last week, D. Michael Quinn asserts that 1842-44 was the most active
time for the Mormon church theologically speaking. 1842 Nauvoo Mormonism
was bringing in such a broad diversity of people from all walks of life.
Prior to the Europe mission trip by the Quorum of Apostles, Mormonism
was a purely American religion. Suddenly thousands of converts flooded
their way into the Kingdom on the Mississippi bringing all sorts of
diversity and schools of philosophy and religion along with them. Europe
has consistently remained a few decades ahead of America in most fields
of progressivism. That's painted with a really broad brush but I believe
it's true for the most part. Slavery, women's rights, and a number of
other major social issues seem to have had a foothold in Europe decades
before becoming public on this side of the pond.

This major influx of progressive European immigrants altered Mormonism
from that time forward. Most of the brazenly distinguishing
characteristics of Mormon doctrine and practice come from this brief
period of a major influx of new ideas and philosophies. Ideas like a law
of adoption into one cohesive eternal family, a plurality of gods, the
details of the plan of salvation and exaltation, Kolob and the Book of
Abraham, the Articles of Faith, temple ceremonies and baptisms for the
dead, doctrinal polygamy, and a number of other peculiar pieces we'll
eventually get in to which composed the puzzle of Nauvoo Mormonism.

Mormonism was much more fluid back then. I have this model of Joseph
Smith in my mind that he could be approached by somebody with unique
thoughts or a school of philosophy of which he wasn't familiar prior to
their meeting and magically he would issue a new decree from the pulpit
that God or gods spoke with him and revealed a new piece to the Mormon
doctrine puzzle. Joseph's fluid and adaptive Mormonism is nothing like
the Brighamite Church today. For Mormon doctrine to change in the 1840s,
a person would wait until the next Sunday when Jo would deliver his next
treatise on deeper Mormon doctrine. Deliberation was tolerated at the
same time people were being excommunicated frequently for setting
themselves up as prophets.

Today, however, in order to change something within Mormonism, a
groundswell movement with thousands of supporters voicing their concerns
with their bishops and stake presidents, sending letters to General
Authorities, and demonstrating publicly doesn't seem to be enough force
to change doctrine. Threats to the corporation by the Government seem to
be effective but those always seem to be last resorts after years of
public demonstrations from within the organization.

Look, if you run a major organization, it can be hard to take criticism.
You're used to the way things operate and listening to criticism and
making changes because of it exibits vulnerability in many ways. Whether
that's vulnerability to admitting that the system has flaws or
vulnerability to bending to the will of the public who may or may not
have the organization's best interests in mind. It can be hard to deal
with criticism. The larger and older any organization gets, arguably the
harder it becomes to change things from the way they are. Now, to
complicate these issues even further, when that massive 185 year old
organization claims to be speaking for God, any criticism is of the
adversary and requires being dealt with appropriately.

Our next guest went through an interesting set of circumstances in an
attempt to change church doctrine. She organized multiple protests
trying to get into Priesthood sessions of General Conference, she sent
conversation packets to the apostles claiming historical precedent for
giving the priesthood to women, and it all ended with her being dealt
with appropriately, excommunication in absentia.

Bear with me for a moment while I give her a proper introduction, she
has quite the rap sheet.

Kate Kelly is a zealous advocate and passionate activist. She has a JD
from [American University Washington College of
Law](https://www.wcl.american.edu/history/founders.cfm), the only law
school in the world founded by, and for, women. She graduated cum
laude in 2012, and received the Class of 2012 Peter M. Cicchino Award
for Outstanding Advocacy in the Public Interest. In her legal career she
has had various incredible opportunities including working as an Ella
Baker Fellow at the [Center for Constitutional
Rights](http://ccrjustice.org/); a law clerk at the [Inter-American
Court of Human Rights](http://www.corteidh.or.cr/index.php/en); a
research assistant to the Chair of the [United Nations Committee Against
Torture](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CAT/Pages/CATIndex.aspx) in
Geneva, Switzerland; a post-grad fellow at the [Women's Refugee
Commission](https://www.womensrefugeecommission.org/about/staff/173-migrant-rights-justice);
an attorney at the [RFK Center for Justice & Human
Rights](http://rfkhumanrights.org/who-we-are/); Legal Advisor for [Legal
Action Worldwide](http://www.legalactionworldwide.org/) working on
sexual violence legislation in Somalia, and litigating before the
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights; consultant for the
United Nations High Commission on Refugees report [Women on the
Run](http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/publications/operations/5630f24c6/women-run.html);
and Strategic Advocacy & Policy Counsel at the [Planned Parenthood
Association of
Utah](https://www.plannedparenthood.org/planned-parenthood-utah).

She is a vocal women's rights champion in the U.S., and around the world
and is currently the Human Rights in the US legal fellow at Columbia Law
School's Human Rights Institute. Kate, welcome and thank you so much for
joining us.

For somebody who may have never heard your name or is unfamiliar with
your work, in case the name of the movement isn't self-explanatory
enough, tell us about Ordain Women and what it seeks to accomplish.

Finish KK Interview

The truth of the matter is it's really hard to change things in a church
led by a group of men who were cognizant of world events during World
War II. They grew up and matured in a different world than we inhabit
today. These men were on their missions more than half a century ago.
They were born before there was a single temple outside the contiguous
United States. They don't see anything wrong with the system because
they're completely insulated from what's happening on the ground level,
and that is unacceptable.

There's a glimmer of hope here. The more the Church leadership digs in
their heels on these important human rights issues, the more people
become disenchanted. People won't continue to just ignore issues like
Protect LDS Children, McKenna Denson, Ordain Women, and any of these
other social movements pushing for change within the Church. The longer
the leadership ignores these issues, the more people simply walk away.
The anecdotal evidence of wards closing or being consolidated world-wide
and the Church's own statistics revealing stagnating growth, coupled
with tax exemption being revoked in Europe due to the exclusivity of
temple attendance, all of these are pressures the Church MUST respond to
in some way. The longer they don't respond, the further they dig
themselves into this hole.

Something bears attention here. When it comes to these various
movements, public criticism from within the movements doesn't do any
good. Activists can overstep boundaries or make people feel
uncomfortable, but lobbing bombs at each other, especially when a
private conversation would suffice and be much more effective, only
damages the movements and decreases their effectiveness. Infighting
doesn't bring diversity, it weakens the foundation. The leadership of
the Church relies on a lack of cohesion for these groups to be less
effective, and to see the online criticisms of Kate Kelly and other
activists working to change the church is something the leadership
relies on to destroy the cohesiveness of any given movement and prevent
any changes from actually happening.

On a personal note; I've been following these social movements for years
now. My opinions of the Church and its leadership have vacillated along
the spectrum of vitriol and anger to pity for the leadership being
victims of the system they unwittingly perpetuate. Seeing the Church
stagnating the way it is and watching so many online movements crop up
in opposition to the status quo is heartening. For every story I read on
the exmormon subreddit of a transition story or a resignation sent
through quitmormon.org, to every blog post lobbing bombs at the
leadership, I'm absolutely giddy about this. I'm revealing my biases and
transparency is important when it comes to these issues. In short, it's
really fun to watch this train-wreck in slow motion. It's not fun to
watch those who are hurt and damaged by it, that's an important
distinction to make, but the institution itself floundering in
uncertainty of what the future holds with absolutely no solutions to
keep the monster fed; that's something worth relishing as we watch the
Mormon Church continue to degrade into antiquity.

House Cleaning:

Masonry corrections

Ceremony changes: The ceremony has changed so many times over the
Brighamite history. It wasn't just in 1990 when they retired the
washings and anointings as removed the violent consequences actions,
there were changes long before that and have been changes since. You'll
find a link in the show notes which document the evolution of the temple
ceremony since its inception in 1842.

Also, Cheryl pointed out that when I asserted that Bennett likely used
connection he made in his Masonic days prior to joining Mormonism in
order to lobby the Illinois government to pass the Nauvoo Charter. I
need to clarify that this is pure speculation, but it seemed rather
reasonable to me.

An email came in from a Mason and I'll briefly quote it here.

I am a Christian (campbellite actually) and a Freemason, as well as a
few other things. I have to tell you how much I enjoyed your excursions
into both of those areas, particularly the most recent episode about
freemasonry\'s influence upon mormonism. For a non-masonic historian,
you could not have done much better in my estimation. (Years ago I
fancied myself something of a masonic historian). I suppose if we were
\'having coffee\' I would add some \'nuance\' to what you imparted, but
generally speaking the episode was fair, informative and accurate. 

I learned nothing about Freemasonry, but it answered a question that was
never fully answered before. While I was active in Freemasonry I had the
pleasure of befriending a mormon within the lodge. We went through the
first three degrees at different times, but both went through the Royal
Arch degrees together. At one point, in the ritual he turned to me and
said, \"Oh. Now I see why the Bishop discouraged me from becoming a
mason. This raises a lot of questions within me.\" He then went on to
describe exactly what we were going to experience in the ritual we were
participating. He was correct. I have to say it kind of lessened the
effect it might have had on me - you know, ruining the any surprise that
might have been coming. Later I asked him \"how\'d you know all that?\"
\"Dude,\" he said, \"That\'s our temple ritual.\" Because of that
experience he later told me he left the LDS and is now a protestant
Christian. 

Your show really fleshed out - put a lot more meat on those bone - for
me. I really  really LOVED that episode. I do have one petty, very small
correction. In your opening, or somewhere near it you described masonry
as \"a boy\'s club where ideas are exchanged, and there\'s a lot of
drinking.\" (I\'m not sure you said a lot) Here\'s the minor correction:
(I should add that I know this to be true only in 5 grand jurisdictions
where I have attended lodge, it could be different elsewhere, but I
would surprised) Drinking is not allowed. Further if it is apparent that
a brother has been drinking he will be asked to leave, but of course
welcome to return. In fact, the shrine often referred to as \"the
playground of masonry\" was created, in large part, to provide a setting
in which Masons could have a drink together.

Again, thank you for your work. I\'m not sure what your motivation for
beginning this podcast was, but I have to tell you my confirmation bias
going in was that it was going to confirm my then existent general low
regard for mormonism. I, like most orthodox christians have been
indoctrinated to view mormonism as heresy. I must say, especially
recently, my opinion, at least of \'main-line\' LDS, is far more
favorable than it was initially.

Just to respond to that, before lodges and temples were constructed,
Masons largely met in taverns. It doesn't immediately follow they were
getting hammer-smashed drunk, but some of them would drink during
meeting. Also, much of the temperance movement in America was supported
by Masonic lodges and Christian organizations filled with people who
were Masons. As with everything in most episodes of this show, there's a
lot of nuance to the subject matter. Thank you for the email and the
correction, Carl.

Connor Email:\
Got in another email and I'm going to read it with permission from the
sender.

Hey Bryce!

So I don't know if people normally do this, but I thought I'd drop you a
message to go over my history with the podcast and why I've decided to
become a patron. It's a bit of a long email, so apologies in advance!

And it came to pass (drink!) that about a year and half ago I was trying
to find some kind of audio reading of the Book of Mormon to help with
scripture study and just to generally to have scriptures I could listen
to when I was out and about. I listened to a few, and it was mostly
older guys reading it all monotone and boring, but then I came across a
little podcast called My Book Of Mormon. I listened to the first couple
of episodes and fairly quickly found myself warming to David. As a
convert, a lot of the jokes he made about the material resonated with me
and I loved the outsider perspective. 

Around late May to early June last year I got to your guest episode on
Alma 57. Like David, I warmed to you immediately and started listening
to Naked Mormonism. At the time I was preparing to leave for my mission
(I got my call a month after I left to Greece btw). As part of my
preparation I was looking into 'anti-Mormon' material so I would be able
to answer questions investigators might have, rather than be blindsided
by issues I didn't know existed.

Part of those materials was your podcast. As something of an amateur
historian I was (and still am) interested in early church history, and
whilst the official church history was fine, the NaMo podcast was so
well researched and backed up with historical evidence that I started
being unable to ignore some of the conclusions you were coming to.
Eventually (around late September) I got round to your mammoth Book of
Mormon origin episode and my shelf, started by David, was finally broken
by you. The evidence that the BoM was an 19th century work, and a
plagiarised work at that, was incontrovertible. 

I put a post up on Facebook towards the end of October that I was
leaving the church, which didn't go down well. I think the terms 'Satan
worshiper' and 'son of Satan' were said, but I haven't looked back. It's
been a rough few months as I've tried to deprogram myself, but this
podcast, as well as the fine work David has done an that you and Marie
continue to do, have been a big factor in that, so from the bottom of my
heart, a big thank you to all three of you for the support you have
unknowingly provided and for helping me to see the church for what it
really is- a way for rich men to get richer under the illusion (or
delusion) of religion. 

Sadly at the present time, I'm only able to contribute to one podcast,
otherwise I'd be a patron of My Book Of Mormon too, but I'm hoping
within the next few weeks my financial situation will allow me to do
both.

Thank you again, Bryce. Keep up the amazing work that you do and I look
forward to the next episode!

Kind regards,

-Connor

WTADP NaMo HE

Include date at end of show

Sunstone in Short Creek. Service project donate here
<http://thefernfoundation.org/donate>

<nakedmormonism@gmail.com> keep sending in the feedback and let me know
what you think, I try my best to reply to every email but some
inevitably slip through the cracks. Be sure to give us a follow on
Facebook and Twitter and any place you can leave a review for the show
really helps spread the word. Thanks to everybody who does those things,
you're awesome!
