---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 97 - Lawsuits, Politics, and Temples
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-97-lawsuits-politics-temples/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-97-lawsuits-politics-and-temples
category: History
date: 2018-04-06 07:01:18 +0000
---

Ep 97 – Lawsuits, Politics, and Temples

On this episode, we take a step back and try to view the recent
headlines with a little bit of historical perspective. From the current
rape scandal, to general conference, to the Protect LDS Children march,
we try to put historical context on everything which happened this past
week. We’ll resume our historical timeline of early Mormonism next week,
this week it’s just journalism surrounding the modern SLC Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Links:

Stop Protecting Sexual Predators  
<http://fox13now.com/2018/03/31/stop-protecting-sexual-predators-outburst-interrupts-lds-general-conference/>

Protect LDS Children YouTube Channel  
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCUSUZZatSX4OuckwPx3p_3g>

Jonathan Streeter Thinker of Thoughts  
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCVTCFh3uDMH0GZlwl1JOoHQ>

Oaks Christofferson on Trib Talk  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UIJ6gL_xc-M&t=556s>

General Conference Sunday Session  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ENDfYD-4giE>

Russel M. Nelson ‘Ministering’ Priesthood Session  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WByHuTYV1yQ>

Quentin L. Cook ‘non-consensual immorality’ 8:00  
<https://www.lds.org/general-conference/2018/04/prepare-to-meet-god?lang=eng>

Mormon ‘non-consensual immorality’ reddit megathread  
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/>

McKenna Denson v. Joseph Bishop & LDS Inc.  
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/4431649-Denson-v-Bishop-LDS-Church.html>

$40 mil/year in humanitarian aid  
<https://www.deseretnews.com/article/865657898/LDS-Church-welfare-humanitarian-efforts-average-40-million-per-year-apostle-says.html>

Mormon Leaks ‘In which they discuss politics with Senator Gordon Smith  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z4FPVZH8fIg>

History of MTCs  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Missionary_Training_Center#Provo_Campus_of_the_MTC>

Dallin Oaks Small and Simple Things  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J0fQ0ABgWKU>  
<https://www.lds.org/general-conference/2018/04/small-and-simple-things?lang=eng>

Dan Coats Director of National Intelligence  
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/leadership/director-of-national-intelligence>

Dan Coats non-profit philanthropic organization  
<http://www.sipr.org/article/a-history-of-far/>

Dan Coats Mending Fences  
<https://books.google.com/books/about/Mending_Fences.html?id=AeHkAAAAMAAJ>

Church Statements on Separation of Church and State  
<https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13986-the-lds-church-and-politics.html>

Ambassador John Huntsman Jr.  
<https://ru.usembassy.gov/our-relationship/our-ambassador/>

Dallin Oaks Criticism  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JxyiHLg59ks>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Quick preface, all the audio clips in today’s show are used under
creative commons licensing and are used legally for commentary and
critique purposes. Most are used with permission from the content
owners. The clips from general conference are owned by Bonneville media
corporation but they are being used here under creative commons. You’ll
find a ton of links in the show notes to all the full video clips and
all cited information.

It’s been an interesting time for reporters who cover the LDS Church. A
lot has happened in the past couple weeks and we’re going to try our
best to do these multiple recent headlines justice and put them into
proper context. I’m going to recount my personal experience with the
Protect LDS Children march and try to offer a unique perspective as best
I can while examining this in a way which makes this episode timeless
even though it’s centered around rather timely headlines that won’t seem
relevant in a few weeks.

STOP PROTECTING SEXUAL PREDATORS clip

That was during the Saturday afternoon session of April 2018 General
Conference. If you’ve been following along the Mormon headlines for the
past few weeks or you’ve listened to the last couple episodes of this
show, somebody shouting Stop protecting sexual predators 3 times in
General Conference seems perfectly rational and justified. But what
about the majority of the 26,000 Mormons sitting in the crowd who likely
hadn’t heard of the Joseph Bishop scandal, the Protect LDS Children
campaign or anything else which may have justified this outrage? How do
they perceive this outburst from the congregation?

The woman who spoke out has since come forward. Crystal Legionaires
cited the recent Joseph Bishop scandal when interviewed by Fox News and
also claimed she was quickly escorted from Church property. She’s since
posted a thread in the exmormon subreddit where she also claims that she
was issued a 1-year ban for all Church property.

Disruptive, out of place, uncalled for. A number of accusations have
been leveled against Crystal for her public opposition, but it’s
understandable that those people are not working from the same
understanding of the Church as Crystal was when she decided to speak up.

That’s a point we can’t lose in this discussion. People sympathetic to a
critical perspective of the Church see a completely different Mormonism
than the average General Conference-attending Mormon. The Church is such
a good system of morals, but their truth claims are completely false.
The Church creates an amazing culture to raise families, but they teach
bigotry and hold to racist doctrines. The Church has a no-tolerance
policy when it comes to sexual indiscretions, but they protect rapists
and pay out millions of dollars to cover up sexual assault within their
ranks. The Church spends millions of dollars on humanitarian aid in
impoverished countries every year, but they spend billions per year on
for-profit businesses and on great and spacious buildings used for
nothing other than magic ceremonies.

We’re talking past each other. Two groups shouting about the same
institution, but at some level, Mormonism does all of these things, it’s
just a matter of what’s important to the two tribes. What’s worth
focusing on? What’s the most important teaching or most egregious
immoral action committed by the Church? How can we reconcile these
models of the Church and have a conversation about the issues instead of
our subjective interpretation of what the issues mean?

Let’s present some of these issues. I’ll attempt to present what seems
to be the crux of these issues and allow you to interpret for yourself
what the issues mean. You know my biases by this point.

Let’s begin by picking up where we left off last week. Amidst the sexual
assault Joseph Bishop scandal arising right before conference, the
Protect LDS Children march launched Friday March 30<sup>th</sup> at
noon. The march happened the weekend of the semi-annual General
Conference, where 26,000 Mormons all gather in a congregation at the
conference center just North of Temple Square. It’s important to
recognize that a lot of those Mormons in attendance flew in from out of
town on Friday morning and were planning on spending the day touring
temple square and the conference center, but unbeknownst to them, there
were nearly 1,000 people with picket signs marching 5 blocks up state
street. Traffic was at a standstill with the police sectioning off all
the blocks we marched on the busiest street in Downtown SLC. Buses were
parked, people couldn’t cross the street through the march, people were
late for work or had to wait longer to get to their lunch destination.
All the logistical challenges a democratic system with freedom to gather
creates was exactly why this march was so noticeable and important.

STREETER INTERVIEW

And now, as a little treat for us all, we have somebody on the line who
was at the March and who’s been covering the Protect LDS Children
campaign and the Joseph Bishop scandal since the stories broke. You may
know him by his public presence as Thinker of Thoughts posting under the
YouTube and twitter handles of Thoughts on Things and Stuff, but we call
him friend of the show, Jonathan Streeter. Jon, how are you this fine
evening?

You were on the front lines actually handing a booklet to the
ambassadors the COB sent down, tell us what happened there.

Did Evil Apostate have a good time at the rally and march as well?

Once again, thank you to Jonathan Streeter and Evil Apostate for their
quick take on the march. The rally, march, and gathering at the Union
Event center afterwards made for a powerful and incredible day for those
in attendance. I would recommend you check the Protect LDS Children
youtube channel to see the interviews which were conducted, they’ve
posted 4 so far at the time of recording this episode and there are many
more on the way.

The march itself attempted to get the Church to change its policies on
how bishop’s interviews are conducted within the Church. Namely, no more
one-on-one interviews and no more sexual questioning. Let’s review a
couple clips. These are all posted on the Protect LDS Children youtube
channel which you’ll find links to in the show notes, and I’d recommend
watching the videos there or you can watch the 360 video I took and
posted of the entire rally and march. These clips are used with
permission from Sam Young and the Protect LDS Children organizers.

First, the opening speech by Sam Young himself, here’s a brief overview
of what the petition and march calls for. The clip begins with
acknowledging the Church making a slight policy change where they allow
parents to be present during bishops interviews, but as Sam says, the
changes fall woefully short of what’s needed. This clip is just under
3.5 minutes, bear with me.

1)  Sam Young

The next person to speak was, Joelle Casteix, the Wester Regional Leader
of SNAP, the Survivors Network for those Abused by Priests. Joelle is a
bit of an authority figure with her position in SNAP. She’s been trained
to recognize sexual abuse at any level inside faith traditions and she’s
been a powerful advocate of this cause since the beginning. This clip is
just over 2.5 minutes.

2)  Joelle Casteix

The next clip comes from the speech given by Katie Langston. Katie comes
from a unique perspective. She grew up in the Church and has just
finished her pastoral training in counselling and theology to become a
Lutheran Minister. She really drives the point home at just how abnormal
it is for the LDS Church to practice worthiness interviews. This clip is
about 2.5 minutes, have a listen…

3)  Katie Langston

The next clip is from Dr. Mark Malan, a board certified sexologist. As
Jonathan said in the interview, Malan offers some much needed scientific
perspective as one of his primary fields of study is the effects and
treatment of psychosexual shame. This is where he delineates the
differences between overt and covert sexual abuse happening in the
Church. He begins by telling the crowd that the Sacred Stories collected
on the campaign website provide a plethora of data for psychologists to
examine and goes on to tell us what he sees in the data as a scientist.
This clip is a bit longer, but I think it’s imperative to understand the
type of abuse that is happening and be able to apply scientific
definitions to it.

4)  Mark Malan

After that, he tells of Elizabeth Smart’s story where she recounts how
she was told that having premarital sex is like becoming a chewed piece
of gum. Once a person’s ‘virtue’ is taken from them, nobody is going to
chew a piece of gum that’s already been chewed. He goes on to tell the
story of Kip Eliason who likely killed himself due to shame of sexual
desires and masturbation spurred by bishop’s interviews. He concludes
with saying that sexual desires need to be acknowledged as stages of
healthy psychological development instead of shamed. I’ll play just a
few seconds of his concluding remarks

5)  Mark Malan conclusion

Finally we get to the last speech of the rally, Natasha Helfer Parker.
Parker is a practicing family therapist and licensed sex therapist
working with Mormons and Exmormons for the past 20 years who works with
the Open Stories Foundation. She is particularly poignant and helped to
properly rile up the crowd for the march itself.

6)  Natasha Helfer Parker

You may be wondering to what Parker was referring when she invoked Oaks
name and said that apologies help people to heal. Back in early 2015,
before the November policy was released making the Church’s stance on
LGBTQ relationships abundantly clear, Oaks was quoted by the Salt Lake
Tribune saying “We don’t seek apologies, nor do we give them.” In a
follow up interview between Jennifer Napier-Pearce of the Salt Lake
Tribune and Dallin Oaks accompanied by D. Todd Christopherson, the
question was put to Oaks seeking further clarification of what he meant.
During the interview, Oaks was fighting a bit of a cold and his voice is
a bit like gargling broken glass, so I’m sorry if this next 1:21 is hard
to listen to. Here it is from the SL Tribune.

7)  Oaks apologies

This interview was taken at a particularly interesting time when the
Church was sponsoring a bill to push for religious freedom as well as
non-discrimination in early 2015. Should you choose to watch the entire
interview, you’ll find it linked in the show notes or you can search
YouTube for “Trib Talk: LDS Leaders Oaks, Christofferson will appear on
Trib Talk to discuss religious freedom…” Jennifer Napier-Pearce tries
her best to nail the two apostles down on exactly what they hope to get
from the passage of the bill, but it was an exercise of catching an
octopus with net made of chain-link fence.

What would the Church need to apologize for? What have the brethren done
to the members of the Church which would merit or demand an apology from
them? It was made abundantly clear at the rally and march that the abuse
perpetrated through bishop’s interviews is a psychologically damaging
practice and simply changing the current policies to conform with the
demands of the Protect LDS Children campaign is only part of the
solution. It doesn’t seem unreasonable to demand an apology for causing
the self-loathing and resulting suicide of members of the Church, but
that would be admitting fault at some level, which the leadership of the
Church has absolutely no interest in doing.

General Conference following the rally and march was interesting to
watch. Many of us sat with baited breath awaiting some acknowledgment of
fault or a policy change at some level in direct response, but it was
naïve to hope for such an immediate response without any true legal or
monetary threats.

The speakers at General Conference have an impressive ability to address
concerns with veiled language. You have to understand a lot of Mormon
terminology to pick out the important pieces from 10 hours of talks and
hymns. The new prophet, Russell M. Nelson, chose to address worthiness
interviews during the Priesthood session. His entire talk is 14.5
minutes, but I’ve extracted the relevant pieces where he seems to be
answering the Protect LDS Children campaign and worthiness interviews in
general. When he admonishes stake presidents and bishops to ensure each
priesthood holder goes through the necessary spiritual and worthiness
preparation required to call upon the power of god, he’s talking about
one-on-one interviews to make sure young men are ‘worthy’ which includes
probing questions into their sexuality.

Nelson Worthiness

As I said, veiled language and 10 hours of it to sift through makes for
a lot of men saying so much, while at the same time conveying so little
information. It’s necessary to stay on the lookout and know the
terminology to pick out these references to current events within the
Church and understand what the Church plans on doing about them.

The veiled messaging didn’t stop with Nelson’s priesthood session talk
referencing the Protect LDS Children campaign.

Apostle Quentin L. Cook’s talk referenced the recent scandal with
McKenna Denson, who we know as Jane Doe, and Joseph Bishop when he raped
her in the MTC as the MTC President. The phrasing Cook used caused
incredible backlash in online communities and social media. Here’s the
clip from his Conference talk starting around the 8-minute mark.

Quentin Cook Immorality

The question remains, is ‘non-consensual immorality’ the best term for
describing rape? Beyond that, his phrasing of non-consensual immorality
being exposed seems to distance the Church’s part in the exposure and
seeming efforts to cover-up the Joseph L. Bishop rape scandal. Saying
“It is commendable that non-consensual immorality has been exposed and
denounced,” masks what truly happened. Joseph L. Bishop allegedly raped
McKenna Denson while she was a vulnerable missionary at the MTC and
Bishop was apparently never punished legally or ecclesiastically for his
multiple offenses of sexual abuse, even though he admitted on tape to
confessing these illegal offenses to members of the Quorum of the
Seventy multiple times during his long and colorful Church career. This
rape scandal was exposed in spite of what the Church had done to
allegedly cover it up. It was exposed even though the Church seems to
have been working for over 3 decades to cover it up that it ever
happened.

Cook went on to assert that ‘non-consensual immorality’ has been
denounced. The Church has repeatedly denounced any involvement in
covering up alleged rape by Bishop as MTC President. The Church has a
long-standing no-tolerance policy when it comes to sexual assault. If
the allegations contained in the leaked audio and subsequent reporting,
this represents a vast disparity between policy and practice.

People are justifiably angry about many details of this story. For
starters, who knows what a tolerance-policy for sex abuse would look
like, so of course they and most other organizations have similar
policies in place. Secondly, a Church or any organization having a
no-tolerance policy for sex abuse and then actively covering it up
represents a massive betrayal of trust held by every chapel-attending
Mormon. We’ll continue to talk about the current rape scandal plaguing
headlines about the Church, but another couple interesting details are
worth throwing in the mix concerning April 2018 General Conference.
We’ll get to Joseph Bishop and McKenna Denson momentarily, so put a
mental pin in that.

A few historic changes occurred in General Conference. Specifically,
they decided to eliminate the High Priests quorum and consolidate it all
into the Elders Quorum. There could be many motivations behind doing
this, but should I hedge a speculative guess, I would assume that Church
attendance in High Priests is relatively stable being the older
generation. However, some indicators have shown that Elders quorums are
on the decline. A lot of people in the age range of 21-45 are leaving
the Church right now and taking their families. Consolidating the two
quorums may mask the current hemorrhaging of membership.

In addition, a new detail could only be noticed if you’ve watched every
conference since the 90s. It was standard practice for at least the
previous 20 years for the Church to read Church statistics in General
Conference. Historically they’ve read the number of stakes,
missionaries, wards, and total membership numbers. April 2018 was the
first year in more than 2 decades where they didn’t read Church
statistics from the pulpit. The information is still available on
LDS.org, and if we’re to believe the numbers it exhibits a sharp decline
in growth over the past 3 years, which may help explain why they chose
not to read the statistics in Conference this year.

If the Church is cognizant of a significant decline in active membership
and all the available anecdotal information is truly indicative of a
large trend shift, it would be understandable that they would take
certain actions to mitigate the decline.

Another interesting detail, one of the most dreaded aspect of active
membership is home and visiting teaching. This is the practice where
once per month members meet with other members to see how their family
is doing and deliver the first-presidency message from the monthly
Church periodical, Ensign. The practice is dreaded by the majority of
members and they’re required to report their home and visiting teaching
statistics to the Church. This practice was discontinued in lieu of a
new program known as ‘ministering’ which will be much more social media
and smartphone focused.

The Church also provides a fancy app which taps into your phone’s call
log and provides caller ID on who within the ward is calling to
minister. While this is viewed as a blessing by some, it should be
understood that smartphone apps with access to call logs, pictures, and
messaging collect a lot of data which can be sold to advertising
agencies or used for other purposes by whoever owns the app.

As stated in the previous episode about Jane Doe and Joseph L. Bishop,
the story is constantly developing. On April 3<sup>rd</sup>, Jane Doe
revealed her name, McKenna Denson, to the press and called for a press
conference. Peggy Fletcher Stack with the Salt Lake Tribune reported
that the adopted daughter of Denson, a 35-year-old woman, said she was
surprised to see her name in a dossier compiled by an attorney working
for the Church to apparently dig up all the information he could find on
Denson. This dossier has been used to smear Denson’s character and
attempt to falsify her rape allegations against Joseph Bishop.

Press conference McKenna Denson

There’s a lot to take from the press conference, but the most important
issue worth briefly highlighting is that settlement negotiations between
McKenna Denson and the Church have ceased since the audio was leaked.
Denson responded to a question about how far they’re willing to go with
litigation in the case with a resounding claim that they are ready to go
into discovery and litigate this for years to come. This story has
gotten completely out of the Church’s hands, they simply don’t have
enough extinguishers to put out this fire. We’ll be keeping tabs on this
as it continues to develop.

Denson’s suit demands that the Church call the police first and
eradicate its use of the Church’s internal sex abuse hotline. Settlement
will likely be further discussed, but if Denson doesn’t take a
settlement offer from the Church now that the lawsuit is officially
filed, she and her lawyers will go to court, where the Church’s amazing
lawyers will summarily dismantle the entire case, call her character
into question, and obliterate any presence of McKenna Denson in the Utah
court system. Denson will owe the Church’s lawyers all their legal fees
for years of litigation and she’ll go away as just another rape victim
who lost her case and the Church will never change. I’m sorry to be so
pessimistic, but there are good reasons to go to settlement, especially
when it comes to Bishop’s words vs. Denson’s words in a court of law.
The presiding judge is also a believing Mormon unless he chooses to act
ethically and recuse himself from the case. The case may sound really
good at the surface level especially with the leaked audio, but in a
court of law, Denson and her lawyers will likely be utterly destroyed,
no Church policies will change, and Denson will be financially wrecked
for the rest of her life for speaking out against the Church.

There are problems, how do we address them. We can’t even begin to have
a conversation about fixing issues with the Church and its policies if
we can’t even agree on what those problems are. Both sides of this
conflict are talking past each other. A lot of people don’t want to see
fault within the Church, especially those responsible for how the Church
operates. Representatives for the Church minimizing these issues through
specific terminology and buzzwords is a survival mechanism.

There are a lot of people that simply want to see the Church burn, and
if a rape scandal is the match, then so be it. These diametrically
opposed sides in the conflict will never resolve their viewpoints or
reconcile differences. Maybe we can look at this with a broader
perspective.

Let’s step back and try to gain some perspective instead of just viewing
the details of Denson’s case. We’ve been mired in the details of this
single rape scandal between Joseph Bishop and McKenna Denson since it
was released, but it’s worth taking stock of how frequent similar issues
like this may or may not occur. In 2017, a woman named Deb Diener
published her 316-page expose titled ‘Instances of child sexual abuse
allegedly perpetrated by members of the LDS Church”. This is 316 pages,
some with one entry, some with 6 entries where members of the Church,
often in high-ranking offices like ward bishop, allegedly committed
sexual assault on children from 1959-2017. Each of these cases are
representative of a major issue as only a few cases of sex assault are
ever prosecuted in comparison to how many actually occur.

A challenge when it comes to trying to understand the size and scope of
this issue is the ever-looming presence of Non-disclosure agreements.
The vast majority of sex abuse cases within the Church are settled out
of court and the identities and details of the settlement are usually
sealed behind non-disclosure agreements, barring any outside media from
learning any details.

When a person is raped or otherwise sexually assaulted by a trusted
member of the Church, what would motivate them to take a settlement?
Settlements are powerful tools in the legal process. A settlement stops
a major trial from going to court, being caught up for years in
litigation, reduces the obscene amount owed to lawyers for suits which
would otherwise drag out for years, and it gets the issue out of the
survivor’s life once and for all. If a settlement can’t be reached, the
survivor runs a major risk of not winning the case, which puts them on
the hook to pay the Church’s lawyers hundreds of thousands or millions
of dollars for years of litigation at $150/hr. Settlements reduce the
headache and hopefully after a single institution has paid out enough in
settlements they change their policies of their own accord to stop
having to continue to pay those settlements. That last part of the
settlement equation has yet to happen in the Church with the exception
of simply reiterating time and again their no-tolerance policy on sexual
assault. There’s as disparity between policy and practice.

Settlements are almost never paid out the amount of initial damages
filed in lawsuits. A sex assault survivor files a lawsuit for X dollars,
lawyers talk about it for a few months, then a percentage of that X
number is paid to the plaintiff and their lawyers by the institution or
persons being sued. Settlement doesn’t admit fault. Settlement merely
pays damages and lawyer fees and usually includes these NDAs to keep the
information from going to press.

In addition to Deb Diener’s expose of allegations of sex abuse within
the Church, a number of headlines can be easily accessed when searching
for the LDS Church and sex abuse cases. I’ve compiled a quick list for
us to work with. The dollar-amount figures here only include initial
filing damages, with only one exception, the dollar amounts of the
actual settlements are never included in the headlines.

Top of Form

[Headline from Sept 5, 2001, Church reportedly paid out $3 mil on this
case
only](https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/05/us/mormons-paying-3-million-to-settle-sex-abuse-case.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Here's $750 mil for what seems to be a massive cover-up
in 2000.](https://www.deseretnews.com/article/751668/LDS-Church-hospital-settle-child-abuse-case-out-of-court.html)

Edit: 2000, not 200.

Bottom of Form

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Obligatory Joseph Bishop story although it has yet to be
settled](https://www.sltrib.com/news/2018/03/22/former-missionary-training-center-president-admits-to-asking-a-young-missionary-to-expose-her-breasts-in-the-80s-byu-police-say/)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Church settles Scout troop leader sex abuse scandal,
concluded 2013.](http://www.oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-news/index.ssf/2012/11/idaho_scouts_mormon_church_set.html) Apparently
this settlement for an undisclosed amount (initially sought $5 mil in
damages) took over 4 years to close.

Edit: Added year of settlement.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Noel Anderson was just arrested and is being held in county
jail.](http://starlocalmedia.com/mckinneycouriergazette/news/former-church-instructor-arrested-for-child-sex-assault-mckinney-police/article_c45517bc-3205-11e8-ac49-4fbf97dd4437.html) Obviously
no settlement as the story is so new, but a story worth keeping an eye
out for as it develops.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Here's an example of Bishops not reporting sex abuse when it was
apparently confessed by the perpetrator
in 1995.](https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2018/03/09/former-mesa-police-officer-charged-molestations-decades-after-case-closed/1080835001/)I'm
not sure this story falls under the scope of the megathread as the
Church doesn't seem to be involved in the legal proceedings, but it does
seem to illustrate when a bishop could have spoken up but didn't.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Victim of Indian Placement Program settled suit with Church in 2008
before hearing in South Dakota Supreme
Court.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14146-south-dakota-sex-case-against-mormon-church-resolved.html)
Details of the settlement were not shared with the public.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Maine lawsuit claims Church leaders tried to keep allegations within
the Church and discouraged mother of victim from reporting to outside
authorities. Accused likely completed 10-year sentence
in 2016.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14141-mother-sues-mormon-church-in-abuse-case.html) No
further information on the Church's affiliation with the suit or
criminal conviction of rapist, however, he was in leadership positions
over children while the Church supposedly knew of his past record.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[A total of 8 separate lawsuits for sex-abuse in the Indian Placement
Program as
of 2016.](https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/arizona/articles/2017-08-15/new-lawsuits-allege-mormon-church-failed-to-protect-children) No
further information is available on the outcome of these suits unless
there's some followup headlines I missed.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Scoutmaster received commendation from his bishop that he was a
stand-up guy after being put on the Scout 'perversion list'. Settlement
for undisclosed amount
in 2014.](http://dumaslawgroup.com/lds-church-and-boy-scouts-settle-pennsylvania-sex-abuse-lawsuit/)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Hawaii suit from two men who were assaulted on Church property. They
sought unspecified damages and changes to how the Church handles sex
abuse
in 2014](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/27183-lawsuit-mormon-church-covered-up-sexual-abuse-at-hawaii-camps.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[California Bishop accused of multiple sexual assaults and battery
in 2013. No word on if/how he was disciplined or if the Church paid out
a
settlement.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14536-man-charged-with-sex-crimes-was-mormon-bishop.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Woman in Dublin raped by missionary while other stood guard in 2007. No
further information on whether or not the Church settled the suit but it
did protect his identity and woman alleges the Church tried to cover up
his
actions.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14425-mormon-church-sued-in-dublins-high-court-by-abuse-victim-of-us-missionary.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Scout troop leader and possible bishop abused plaintiff repeatedly
for 4 years, suit filed
in 2011.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14386-former-oxnard-man-alleges-sex-abuse-sues-boy-scouts-mormon-church.html) No
further information on if BSA and Church settled suit, but both
organizations were included as being negligent for allowing man in a
leadership position over vulnerable groups.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[California case where counselor in bishopric abused plaintiff for 8
years settled
in 2010.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14310-church-settles-with-plaintiff.html) Settlement
was reportedly for $100k.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Young Mens leader accused of assaulting 3 young women in Farr West
Utah. Suit filed
in 2010.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14300-lds-youth-leader-accused-of-sex-with-kids.html) No
further information on whether the Church paid out settlement.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[After statute of limitations ran out, this alleged victim was forced to
pay Church's court fees for filing lawsuit in Australia
in 2008.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14191-sexually-abused-woman-loses-bid-to-sue-mormons.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[A respected Priesthood holder in the community allegedly raped 2 boys
for years in UK. Suit filed
in 2008.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14154-mormon-was-mentor-for-church-children.html) No
further information on whether the Church was involved in the case or
paid out settlement.

Bottom of Form

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[$25 mil settlement talks in lawsuit against BSA and Church
in 2008](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14133-talks-aim-to-settle-sex-abuse-lawsuit.html) No
further information of whether or not this was the final settlement
figure.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[2008 suit against BSA and Church for covering up Priesthood holder's
sexual abuse for 6
years.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14111-former-church-leaders-accused-of-molestation-cover-up.html) The
offender apparently absconded to Canada and has yet to face up to his
multiple sexual assault allegations in U.S.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[A total of $4.2 mil awarded to 2 plaintiffs was appealed in 2007,
Church responsible for just under $2 mil of 2008
settlement.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14032-award-cut-in-mormon-church-abuse-case.html)

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[$45 mil went to mediation in lawsuit against Church for covering up for
multiple accounts of rape over 2 years by a home teacher
in 2007.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14011-lawsuit-against-mormons-set-for-mediation.html) Makes
one wonder if there may be some ancillary motivations behind canceling
HT/VT programs...

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[2007 article of Ogden-area bishop using his position to groom and
molest 3 young
girls.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13975-police-say-lds-bishop-used-trust-to-molest-sisters.html) No
further information on the whereabouts of the suit.

Bottom of Form

Top of Form

[Lawsuit claiming $5 mil in damages for covering up for sex abuse
since 2001, article
from 2006.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13880-man-sues-lds-church-claiming-abuse-by-home-teacher.html) No
further information on the details of the resulting settlement.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[Another case of Native American child being abused in the Indian
Placement
Program.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13922-lawsuit-filed-against-church-claims-abuse.html) Abuse
apparently happened in the 60s but was revived when plaintiff had PTSD
flashbacks of the abuse. The suit attempts to correct institutional
issues which lead to the abuse happening.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[Seattle area bishop convicted with Church on the hook for $2.5 mil
which was
appealed.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13859-lds-church-to-appeal-verdict-on-sex-abuse.html) Attorney
for the Church, Von Keetch, stated the jury ruling was a "miscarriage of
justice on the grandest terms" and said the church plans to appeal on
several points of "clear legal error."

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[2004 Primary teacher arrested for assaulting 4 girls
ages 5-6.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13799-lds-teacher-sheriffs-employee-accused-of-abusing-girl.html) No
further information exists on whether or not the Church was aware of his
history with sexual assault before he was called to Primary instructor.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[4-year-old girl contracted genital herpes and it was later discovered
that her abuser had been reinstated in his leadership position after
being excommunicated for non-consensual
immorality.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/13792-family-sues-mormon-church.html) The
man was registered on the Child Sex Offender Registry, but this detail
must have slipped past the bishop who called him to his position.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[2002 lawsuit against the Church for allegedly harboring a
pedophile.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14360-mormon-church-sued-again-regarding-child-sexual-abuse.html) Apparently
the offender was registered on the Sex Offender Registry but the detail
slipped past his bishop. The abuser was never reported or barred from
leadership positions in the Church while being on the registry.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[2002 lawsuit claiming Von Keetch and other Church officials were aware
of abusive proclivities of defendant, but never removed him from
leadership roles or Scout leader, allowing him to continue
abuse](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14350-mormon-church-accused-of-failure-to-report-sexual-abuse.html) No
further information is available on the outcome of the lawsuit or if it
was settled with help from Von Keetch and the Church.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[Lawsuit filed against the Church seeking $120 mil in damages for
covering up sex abuse in the Church and BSA in Oregon
in 2002.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14339-lds-church-is-targeted-in-lawsuit.html) No
further information is available on the outcome of the settlement.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[Von Keetch claimed the Church settled this case which "lacked merit" in
order to stop it from dragging out too long. Settled in 2001 for $3
mil.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14139-sex-abuse-lawsuit-is-settled-by-mormons-for-3-million.html) The
details of the settlement being published by the Church is highly
unusual for unknown reasons.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[Church leader taken into plaintiff's home was known by the Church to be
a pedophile, but didn't warn his hosts before he moved into victim's
home. 2001 case seeking $1.5 bil in
damages.](https://www.culteducation.com/group/1057-the-mormon-church/14073-sex-case-may-pry-open-finances-of-lds-church.html) This
case sought to open the Church's financial situation concerning similar
lawsuits and settlements. No further information is available on the
outcome of the settlement or whether the $1.5 bil was given.

Bottom of Form

[\[–\]](javascript:void\(0\))[**nakedmormonism**](https://www.reddit.com/user/nakedmormonism)\[[S](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/89hy39/lds_nonconsensual_immorality_headlines_megathread/)\] 2
points 1 day ago 

Top of Form

[An entire list of sex abuse cases and settlements
from 1980-2000.](http://mormon-alliance.org/casereports/volume1/part1/v1p1c04.htm) This
is an interesting list as it only tells the details of 3 settlements
which were disclosed. More than a dozen other cases were settled with
effective NDAs so the specific amounts the Church paid out is forever
sealed.

Bottom of Form

This is 2 days of intermittent cursory searching and I’ve found a total
of $2,415,500,000 worth of damages filed against the Church for sex
abuse cases in the span of the most recent 17 years. The Church
champions that it gives out $40mil/year to humanitarian aid, which is
about $700,000,000 in the same timespan, or roughly 28% of the dollar
amount people have sued the Church over in the same time period. Don’t
forget this detail, very few of these headlines actually include damage
amounts filed for in the lawsuit, and the damages filed in the initial
suits aren’t the actual settlement numbers, but what do we possibly do
with those numbers? The real numbers in all the sex assault lawsuits
filed against the Church are much higher than the $2.415 bil number, and
nobody knows what the actual settlement numbers are. But what do we make
of a religion which has been sued for 4 times what they’ve paid out in
humanitarian aid in the past 17 years alone? People will often say the
Church helps so many people, maybe these numbers put the help vs. harm
balance into a bit more perspective for us.

Don’t give your tithing money to the Church\! The Church is actively
covering up sex abuse within its ranks, take them to court\! Resign your
membership\! These are all weaksauce nonsolutions. The people within the
system will do whatever necessary to perpetuate and protect the system,
it’s the system itself which needs to be put on trial. But we can’t lob
criticisms at a system if we don’t understand its scope and power.

The LDS Church is massive. It pulls in billions of dollars tax-free
every year from tithing and makes untold amounts of money every year
from it’s for-profit business endeavors and stock holdings. It wields
unchecked political power while at the same time claiming to be
completely apolitical because it’s a religious organization and
interfering in politics would threaten its tax-exempt status.

We’ve seen social pressure force the Church to change on a few doctrinal
issues in its history. Polygamy was denounced and eradicated in public
practice when Utah was trying to gain statehood and the federal
government disincorporated the Church and the Church’s perpetual
immigration fund, as well as seized all assets the Church owned over
$50,000. The Church allowed African-Americans into heaven when they
realized the Sao Paolo Brazil temple was surrounded by people who
couldn’t enter its doors and Bob Jones University lost its tax-exempt
status for refusing to integrate. When the Church is threatened
monetarily, it moves. These were social movements which caused the
Church to change, but the financial aspect was always the primary
driving force.

I don’t know how to address these modern issues in the Church, I don’t
have a solution. Marching in the streets and gaining massive public
support behind a woman who was raped by the MTC President all makes for
good headlines until the next big thing comes along, but those are only
tiny tools used to incite change, they only add pressure to the more
effective ways of inciting change. I don’t know what solutions need to
take place to stop the Church from doing what it’s doing.

Regardless of negative publicity, the Church continues to march forward
and disregard any criticism. It continues to expand its ever-growing
pool of political and monetary power. The behemoth has grown far beyond
being reasonably reigned in by any person or group of persons.

It’s worth taking a moment to try and parse out what it is we’re dealing
with when it comes to the Church’s politics. During the Trib Talk
interview we played a brief segment of, Oaks and Christofferson both
made it abundantly clear that the Church has little to no political
coercive power when it comes to laws and regulations in Utah. We’ve seen
time and time again that this isn’t really the case.

From an abstinence-only sex ed bill passed in 2012, to Senator Scott
McCoy, the only openly-gay Utah senator who resigned due to unknown
circumstances, to Prop. 8 in California and all the backlash it
suffered, to Orrin Hatch’s presidential campaign in 2000 where he said
the democratic party’s political correctness will be the ruin of the
country right before eluding to Joseph Smith’s White Horse prophecy, to
all the nation-wide Mormon support behind Mitt Romney’s 2012
presidential campaign and current Utah Senator campaign, the Mormon
Church has been largely involved in Utah politics since Brigham Young
brought the Mormons to the Great Basin in 1847 and was elected Governor
over the territory in 1850.

Mormon Leaks first treasure trove of leaks was a number of videos. This
dump was crucial, but there was hours of video and a lot of details
slipped through the cracks. The video titled “In Which they discuss
politics with Senator Gordon Smith” certainly garnered the attention of
yours truly. Senator Gordon Smith was introduced in a private meeting
with the Quorum of the Twelve apostles by M. Russell Ballard, which is
as follows.

Ballard Smith introduction

Then this Ralph guy goes on to introduce the Senator giving his Mormon
pedigree, including his mission, temple marriage, law practice, and
Senatorial race. Ralph testifies as follows:

Ralph Smith Introduction

‘Church-broke’. What does one make of that term being thrown around in a
room of the Quorum of Apostles when referencing a powerful U.S. Senator?
What does a politician have to do to become ‘church-broke’? The detail
of Gordon Smith calling the Church after 6 weeks of no contact and
asking what Smith’s office is supposed to be doing seems to exhibit a
level of constant contact that can’t help but influence Smith’s platform
and agenda to a significant extent. Maybe, calling the Q12 to ask what
they want exhibits what Ballard lovingly referred to as being
‘church-broke’. When you break a horse, you break its spirit of
opposition through menial tasks and strict obedience. When you break a
recruit in the military, they begrudgingly yield their autonomy to those
in a commanding position over them. What does a ‘church-broke’
politician mean?

How about a brief overview of the Church’s public statements concerning
politics?

In 1889 when Utah territory was desperately trying to gain state status
with the federal Government, the First Presidency declared: “Church
government and civil government are distinct and separate in our theory
and practice”.

In 1907, the First Presidency issued this statement: “The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds to the doctrine of the
separation of church and state; the non-interference of church authority
in political matters; and the absolute freedom and independence of the
individual in the performance of his political duties. . . . we favor:
The absolute separation of church and state; No domination of the state
by the church; No church interference with the functions of the state;
No state interference with the functions of the church, or with the free
exercise of religion; The absolute freedom of the individual from the
domination of ecclesiastical authority in political affairs; \[and\] The
equality of all churches before the law”

In 1942, the Presidency said: “The Church stands for the separation of
church and state”.

In 1963, the First Presidency stated: “The Church does not interfere,
and has no intention of trying to interfere, with the fullest and freest
exercise of the political franchise of its members”.

In 1988, they stated: “We have no candidates for political office and we
do not undertake to tell people how to vote”.

How do we reconcile those unequivocal and bold statements with the video
taken in 2009 which seems to exhibit Senator Gordon Smith’s reliance on
the Church to direct his agenda? How do we view all these listed
political motives and campaigns forwarded by the Church when they’ve
made statements in no uncertain terms that they do not interfere in
politics?

Once again, there seems to exist a vast disparity between Church policy
and practice.

A lot can be understood if we merely follow the money. The Church may
move slowly, but that movement is frequently attributed to or
accelerated by money. Whether it’s money the Church may lose, or money
it wants to gain, always follow the money.

Let’s draw lines between all the floating dots so far in the episode.

Missionaries for the Church are colloquially referred to as the Church’s
sales force. Wherever missionaries go, a little bit of success will
eventually merit the installation of a branch, a ward, a stake, and
eventually a temple. Often accompanying a temple is an MTC to train more
missionaries to be a stronger sales force in the area around the temple.
Currently 159 temples operate and 15 MTCs exist usually within eyeshot
of a temple, further expanding the Church’s sales force.

The history of MTCs shows the expanding Church sales force. The first
official MTC was put in Provo in 1978 which coincided with the
completion of the Provo Temple, prior to that MTCs were merely Language
Training Missions usually held in local wardhouses. This whole Joseph
Bishop McKenna Denson sex scandal occurred a mere 6 years after the
first MTC was created, it’s understandable that they had some kinks to
work out of the system with it being so new and Joseph Bishop being part
of the earliest initial management team over the Provo MTC.

The MTC constructed after the Provo MTC was first in Sao Paulo Brazil
right next to the temple, put into use in 1977 before the temple itself
was even dedicated and the priesthood ban was lifted. The England MTC
was first established in London, but was moved to Preston adjacent to
the Preston Temple in 1998. The Mexico City MTC was located in a
reconfigured Church-run High School. Prior to that, the old Mexico MTC
was adjacent to the Mexico City temple, but could only accommodate 125
missionaries, the new campus, which opened in 2013 can accommodate 1,000
missionaries.

What does it take to build a temple and an MTC? Obviously, a lot of
politics and bureaucracy are necessary to get a temple and MTC built in
any location. Any time a company wants to expand its sales force
overseas, they have to get through a lot of red tape to do so. Putting
temples in Utah is so easy they’ve done it nearly 19 times by this
point. But putting in a temple and MTC in other countries poses a number
of challenging issues politically speaking. The Church needs to have
politicians and ambassadors on its side in order to expand its sales
force to other countries to inevitably begin pulling in tithing from
those locations, tithing which is all funneled back to SLC and is
essentially untraceable by outside overwatch committees. Any income and
dispersals to and from religious nonprofits in America are extremely
hard to track and the information is never publicly available.

Let me play a couple more clips from General Conference. Apostle Dallin
H. Oaks, current first counselor to the prophet, gave an interesting
talk on the importance of taking joy and noticing the Small and Simple
things in life, and how small and simple decisions can lead to important
outcomes. He offered an interesting quote.

Oaks Small and Simple Things

Why did Dallin Oaks quote Dan Coats? If a person quotes another person
who isn’t dead yet, it’s worth examining possible reasons why the
specific person was chosen to be quoted. Daniel Coats is the current
director of National Intelligence. From his profile page on DNI.gov:

“The Honorable Daniel Coats was sworn in as the fifth Director of
National Intelligence on march 16, 2017. As DNI, Mr. Coats leads the
United States Intelligence Community (IC) and serves as the principal
intelligence advisor to the President…”

Coats has established a number of diplomatic relationships with European
countries during his time from 2001 to 2005 as Ambassador to Germany. He
returned to the Senate in 2011, didn’t run for reelection in 2016 and
was appointed to the office of Director of National Intelligence by
President Trump.

From the last paragraph of his biography page:

“Dan and Marsha Coats met in college and have three adult children. They
have been active in charitable causes, including The Foundation for
American Renewal, which they formed together. DNI Coats has served as
President of Big Brothers Big Sisters of America and on the boards of
many civic and volunteer organizations.”

From the Mission statement of the non-profit Dan and his wife, Marsha,
Coats run.

“As a United States Senator in the 1990s, Dan Coats led the Project for
American Renewal which featured a legislative package aimed at
supporting grassroots charities through tax credits and innovative
policy solutions. This work is considered by many to be the forerunner
to President Bush’s Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and
it continues to have influence in philanthropy policy (tax credits) and
practice. His vision for American renewal through faith and community
solutions is articulated in his book *Mending Fences*, and in the
numerous speeches and essays contained on this website. 

Mrs. Coats enjoys a long legacy of Christian philanthropy modeled by her
parents and continued through her shared leadership of the Foundation
for American Renewal.”

It seems that Dan Coats and his non-profit seek to funnel money into
other non-profits through tax credits. One wonders whether or not the
LDS Church has ever directly benefitted from Coats non-profit
faith-based tax credit initiatives.

Look, maybe Dallin Oaks really likes Coats’ book, Mending Fences, that’s
a perfectly rational explanation for why Oaks chose to quote Coats. It’s
also understandable that religious non-profits in America enjoy a
certain level of government oversight which is spectacularly
lackadaisical, and religious non-profits may help each other out when
their particular goals align.

Could Oaks not find any minimalist philosophers to quote instead? I’m
just struggling with how to understand this quote in the broader context
of Church interests. Maybe that’s the issue, maybe we shouldn’t look to
connect dots if the available information can be otherwise explained,
but like I said, it’s important to follow the money. This quote is
merely one more fascinating detail to add into the mix of Church
politics.

Another fascinating detail merits passing acknowledgment at very least.
John Huntsman Jr., a well-known wealthy Mormon who began his political
career as staff assistant to Ronald Reagan, has historically been rather
favorable to the Church. One is forced to wonder whether or not Huntsman
is ‘Church-broke’ viewing his political campaign. Huntsman has served 5
presidents as Ambassador to Singapore, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Asia, U.S. Trade Ambassador, and most recently, U.S.
Ambassador to China, and he was twice elected governor of Utah.

In October 2017, Huntsman was appointed by President Trump to be
Ambassador to Russia. This leads me to ponder the most striking feature
about General Conference. This announcement by the new prophet received
feedback from the reverent crowd which is a particularly rare occurrence
in General Conference. Have a listen…

Nelson Temples

Why Russia? Why not literally anywhere else especially given so much
controversy surrounding Russia and politics right now? The Church
doesn’t want negative PR or to be caught in the middle of something
which may tarnish its sacred name, why have they put themselves in this
precarious political situation with John Huntsman as the current
Ambassador to Russia? It may sound crazy to say this, but maybe some
Russian oligarch tithing that’s nearly untraceable would be a welcome
influx of cash to the Church amidst some possible indicators that
membership growth and tithing in on the decline in America, the Church’s
largest market. I mean, temples and adjacent MTCs are a great indicator
of the expansion of the Church sales force, have you seen D.C. Temple?

Look, I presented a lot of information today and I’m trying to allow you
as the listener to connect the dots among all this information. My
presentation is obviously biased and it’s incredibly difficult to view
all this information and not come to some tin-foil hat conclusions.
Instead of entertaining thoughts that the Church is run by lizard aliens
from the future, I’ll just conclude with the following.

I don’t know what it is we’re dealing with here. Watching the recent
events unfold and seeing how much political power and wealth the Church
throws around leads me to conclude that whatever we think might be
happening with the Church, we’re definitely wrong. The fact of the
matter is, the Church is a massive multi-national company with tens of
billions in assets and billions coming in tax and regulation free from
all over the world. No combination of words can properly describe how
powerful Mormonism is. Whatever we on the outside think is going on, we
truly have no idea. We can sit back and say there are problems and there
may be some rational solutions to these individual problems, but nobody
has a useful or even a possible solution to deal with the true problem
creating all these other ancillary issues. The Church is a behemoth that
no single entity controls. It’s a colossus of epic proportions seemingly
with its own sentience which is only marginally swayed by the actions of
those at the helm.

All this makes me glad I run the podcast the way I do. I’m happy to be a
gnat to the Church, I’m not even on their radar. Kate Kelly, John
Dehlin, Denver Snuffer, McKenna Denson, Sam Young, all these people
stand among a tiny platoon of opposition directly in the shadow of this
colossus, and it’s coming for them when they become too much a nuisance
to ignore. I do not envy them. I’m glad these people do what they do and
call out the Church for egregious immorality on multiple fronts, but the
Church isn’t going to change because of these people… are you kidding
me? The Church will change when the government or court systems threaten
their pocket book in some way, but not a moment before. I don’t say this
to concede defeat on some level, but merely to point out that screaming
at the Church and marching to their doorstep is kindly asking a bear to
not attack after we’ve woken it from its slumber. What do we expect to
happen? Given the roots of Utah Mormonism and Bloody Brigham Young’s
tyrannical theocratic reign, would we expect to see anything other than
what lives on 140 years after his death as modern-day Mormonism?

Mormons are the nicest people I’ve ever met. Mormons are my friends,
family, and loved ones, as much as I wish that weren’t the case. But,
all things considered, MormonISM, and the power it wields, is utterly
terrifying.

Hangout Mormon leaks team Sunday 4/8 for patrons.
