---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 128 - Bennett Meltdown Pt 5: Fugitive Prophet
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-128-bennett-meltdown-pt-5-fugitive-prophet/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-128-bennett-meltdown-pt-5-fugitive-prophet
category: History
date: 2018-11-08 20:30:40 PST
---

Ep 128 – Bennett Meltdown Pt 5: Fugitive Prophet

On this episode, we finally return to our historical timeline and the
Bennett Meltdown. Jo starts in the custody of the Adams County Sheriff.
An “escape” occurs and Jo flees town with a bit of trickery. We spend
some time reading letter correspondence between Jo and other “thinking
few” Mormon elites.

Links:

Letter to Wilson Law  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1>

Letter from Wilson Law  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-15-august-1842/1>

Letter to Emma Smith  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#full-transcript>

Letter from Emma Smith  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#full-transcript>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Don’t miss the NaMo Home Evening here:  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s8OKhA1D2pg>

Catch me with ObjectivelyDan this Friday at 6 P.M. CT here:  
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCKzYd1mJ8M1pUZ7cM1nwyPA>

49dollarsites.com

We’re picking up right where we left off with Jo and friends in Nauvoo,
August of 1842.

We’ve been absent our historical timeline for a number of weeks now so
it feels like a little bit of a review is in order. If you’re listening
to this in the backlog and the timeline is contiguous for you, my
apologies, but for everybody else, hopefully this will help bridge the
month-long gap.

Our timeline sits amidst the ruins of the Bennett Meltdown. John C.
Wreck-it Bennett had spent a year and a half as the right-hand man of
Joseph Smith, collecting a ton of information. Now, beginning in July
1842, he published his first expose letters in the Sangamo Journal.
These letters contained vicious accusations of Jo’s true theocracy. Jo’s
theocracy without the veil of prosperity being touted about by the
leadership looked like a completely different beast, medusa removing her
mask, if you will.

Add in to the PR nightmare that was Wreck-it Bennett’s exposes,
ex-governor and current senatorial candidate, Lilburn Boggs of Missouri,
had awakened from the assassination attempt and swore out an affidavit
leading to the arrest of Jo and his best friend, Pistol Packin Porter
Rockwell. When we left off, they were both in the custody of Adams
county constables with an extradition order in hand to take them to
Missouri. What awaited them in Missouri? The charges of conspiracy to
assassinate a government official on one hand, and on the other, the old
charges from the 1838 war of arson, robbery, and high treason. As soon
as Jo and Port make it across the state line into Missouri in the
custody of government officials, they’re doomed to the gallows or firing
squad. There was no question or ambiguity about that. They just needed
to remain under the safe umbrella of Nauvoo and they could survive in
the Mormon kingdom on the Mississippi.

However, they had limited time and options to affect a plan. Lucky a few
convenient pieces of Nauvoo government were in place to set the
battlefield in their favor.

Before we continue marching forward, I want to take a second to reflect
on how fickle power really is. How easy it is to gain and lose power and
what predicaments are created when single individuals vie for power in a
world of people competing for finite slices of the power pie.

I was thinking back on this year’s Sunstone and a presentation given by
Steve Shields. He gave an overview of the succession crisis and quoted a
number of letters which talked about authority. Who has the authority to
excommunicate whom in the wake of Jo’s death? Who was the one true
prophet? Those two concepts, power and authority, they’re inextricably
tied. But when it all comes down to it, people only have authority if
other people recognize and acknowledge said authority. Same thing with
power. The most powerful politician in the world has just as much
authority as a person screaming on the street corner, the politician
just has more people who recognize and acknowledge that authority. The
politician has more power than the screaming person on the street corner
because they’ve personally seized or have been granted that power by
outside forces. But it’s all entirely a human concept. Like language,
emotions, buildings, all human constructs. The universe doesn’t care
what we call a rock, a rock is just certain matter arranged in a certain
way. The universe doesn’t care who sits on thrones or who begs for food,
power and authority, and the resulting human luxuries both afford, are
just things we all agree to put value in.

Joseph Smith in 1842 had fostered a situation where he had more
authority and power than basically any American religious leader of his
day. Some can say he was granted that authority from a higher power, but
we’ve spent this entire podcast exhibiting exactly the methods by which
he was able to seize and retain control. By 1842 he had roughly 10,000
people calling him the prophet. Claims to be the mouthpiece of God mean
nothing if nobody is listening to what comes out of the claimant’s
mouth. But Jo had an audience, a pulpit he could approach every Sunday
with thousands of people in the audience fawning over his every word. He
had a ton of power and authority in the minds of these people.

A shared trait among most with power and authority is the lack of
willingness to cede such attributes at any cost. When a person gains
power, seldom do they relinquish it willingly, especially in positions
without term limits like prophet of a major religion. Anything
threatening to Smith’s power structure required treatment with the
utmost prejudice and expediency.

Joseph Smith and his enforcer, Pistol Packin Porter Rockwell, in cuffs
headed toward Missouri certainly threatened the tenuous power balance Jo
had manufactured for over a decade at this point. They had to be
released at all costs.

Where we last left off our historical timeline in the HoC Vogel edition
5:80

“This forenoon I was arrested by the Deputy Sheriff of Adams county and
two assistants, on a warrant issued by Governor Carlin, founded on a
requisition from Governor Reynolds of Missouri, upon the affidavit of
Ex-Governor Boggs, complaining of the said Smith as “being an accessory
before the fact, to an assault with intent to kill, made by one O. P.
Rockwell on Lilburn W. Boggs,” on the night of the sixth of May, A.D.
1842. Brother Rockwell was arrested at the same time as principal. There
was no evasion of the officers, though the Municipal Court issued a writ
of habeas corpus according to the constitution of the State Aricle 8,
and Section 13. This writ demanded the bodies of Messrs. Smith and
Rockwell to be brought before the aforesaid Court; but these officers
refused to do so, and finally without complying, they left them in the
care of the Marshal, without the original writ by which they were
arrested, and by which only they could be retained, and returned back to
Governor Carlin for further instructions, and Messrs. Smith and Rockwell
went about their business.”

The Adams county constables had the warrant of arrest for Jo and Port,
but in order to extradite the prisoners to Missouri, they were required
to go back to Governor Carlin in Adams County and acquire the writ. The
constables, and I can’t possibly understand what led them to believe
this was a good idea, left Jo and Port in the hands of the Nauvoo
Marshal, who was Henry G. Sherwood at the time. Sherwood had been a
member since he was baptized 10 years earlier and moved to Kirtland.
Sherwood was an O.G. Kirtland Mormon who’d been through all the hardest
time of the church in K-town and Missouri. He’d always stuck by the
prophet’s side, and these Adams county constables in charge of
extraditing Jo and Port, left them in the custody of Sherwood.

Sure, constable, I’ll keep an eye on them… oh… oh no… they got away… I’m
just all thumbs today.

In response to the Adams County constables getting so close to legally
extraditing Jo and Port back to Missouri, action was needed to keep it
from happening again.

Acting as Vice-Mayor and President Pro-tempore, Hyrum Sidekick Abiff
Smith passed an ordinance, effective immediately.

“Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that
in all cases where any person or persons, shall at any time hereafter,
be arrested or under arrest in this city, under any writ or process, and
shall be brought before the Municipal Court of this city, by vrtue of a
writ of Habeas Corpus, the Court shall in every such case have power and
authority, and are hereby required to examine into the origin, validity
and legality of the writ of process, under which such arrest was made,
and if it shall appear to the Court, upon sufficient testimony that said
writ or process was illegal, or not legally issued, or did not proced
from proper authority, and was a legal process, the Court shall then
proceed and fully hear the merits of the case, upon which said arrest
was made, upon such evidence as may be produced and sworn before said
Court, and shall have power to adjourn the hearing, and also issue
process from time to time, in their discretion, in order to procure the
attendance of witnesses, so that a fair and impartial trial and decision
may be obtained in every such case.”

This created a situation where any person arrested in Nauvoo under any
authority whatsoever, the warrant for their arrest had to undergo review
by the Nauvoo government to ascertain its legality before it could be
carried out. The article in the Nauvoo city charter allowing the city to
issue writs of habeas corpus to any person in custody now had built in
an extra layer of protection. The other provisions in this ordinance add
even more layers playing into the religious persecution narrative of
Mormonism.

“Sec. 2. And be it further ordained that if upon investigation it shall
be proven before the Municipal Court, that the writ or process has been
issued, either through private pique, malicious intent, or religious or
other persecution, falsehood or misrepresentation, contrary to the
constitution of this State, or the constitution of the United States,
the said writ or process shall be quashed and considered of no force or
effect, and the prisoner or prisoners shall be released and discharged
therefrom.”

That was the real teeth of this ordinance. If any writ or process can be
deemed as religious persecution, malicious, or based on falsehood, it’s
quashed and the arrested parties are to be immediately released.
Luckily, Jo and the leadership of Nauvoo were the people who determined
what did or did not constitution maliciousness, falsehood, or religious
persecution. The last two sections of the ordinance just say that if the
Mayor can’t represent himself in these proceedings, then an Alderman can
step in and also that it is effective immediately.

After Jo was released he seemed to ponder in his journal what authority
the constable had to extradite him from Illinois to Missouri.

“I have yet to learn by what rule of right I was arrested to be
transported to Missouri for a trial of the kind stated. ‘An accessory to
an assault with intent to kill,’ does not come under the provision of
the *fugitive* act, when the person charged has not been out of
Illinois, \&c. An accessory before the fact to manslaughter is something
of an anomaly. The isolated affidavit of Ex-Governor Boggs is no more
than any other man’s, and the Constitution says, ‘that no person shall
be liable to be transported out of the State, for an offense committed
within the same.’ The whole is another Missouri farce. (fake news) In
fact, implied power, and constructive guilt, as a dernier resort, may
answer the purpose of despotic governments, but are beneath the dignity
of the Sons of Liberty, and would be a blot on our judicial escutcheon.”

If anything, Jo’s actions and the resulting Nauvoo city ordinance
illustrate just how necessary federal charges and a federal police force
really is. He hadn’t committed the act of conspiracy with Port while in
Missouri, Jo was in Nauvoo the whole time. It wasn’t accessory to
manslaughter as Boggs’ assassination attempt was clearly premeditated
with a clear and distinct motive, but because Jo wasn’t physically in
Missouri when it happened, he was safe unless a writ of extradition was
upheld by Governor Carlin. If Carlin expected the Mormon vote for that
election year of 1842, upholding that writ would turn the largest
population of his constituents against him. But, the kingpin to a
criminal empire lived in Adams county, to which Governor Carlin was
responsible for keeping the peace and rooting out corruption. Carlin
wasn’t in an easy position and Jo was growing stronger by the day.

Nauvoo city government had a ton of power. Now that this ordinance was
in place, it would require the state supreme court to rule it
unconstitutional, but that could only happen after it was exercised and
somebody filed a lawsuit challenging it. That’s the entire point, Nauvoo
government could do whatever it wanted and it took a lengthy and costly
process to curtail its power. Power is gained and seldom given back
freely once acquired.

However, Jo knew that once the constable returned to Nauvoo after a
meeting with Governor Carlin that he’d have the proper paperwork. Pistol
Packin Port immediately fled towards Pittsburgh, which is
understandable. Port pulled the trigger, he was a lot hotter than Jo. On
the other hand, Jo leveraged Nauvoo’s convenient location on the
Mississippi and made it across to the town of Zarahemla in Iowa
territory. Nobody with authority from Missouri or Illinois could touch
Jo out there. Jo made it to a safe location, his uncle John’s house.

Nauvoo became a hostile place with Jo in hiding and Port on the run. The
constable, a sheriff of Adams County, returned to Nauvoo with the
appropriate extradition paperwork, only to find that the prisoners he’d
left in custody of Henry Sherwood had absconded. But, the Sheriff had a
legal duty to carry out the charges of his office to the best of his
ability. He went to the Smith home in Nauvoo, where Emma and her
children were, a hot exchange ensued, but we don’t have record of
exactly what happened.

“Wednesday August 10.—The Deputy Sheriff returned to Nauvoo, but I was
absent, and he did not see me, or brother Rockwell. He endeavored to
alarm my wife and the brethren with his threats, if I was not
forthcoming, but they understood the law in such cases, and his threats
proved harmless.”

They understood the law in such cases. One could make the argument that
they perfectly understood the law as it was crafted by the Nauvoo
government and they used it to allow a fugitive to escape. Yes, they
knew the law, but they also knew the laws of God were superior to the
laws of men. The laws of men wanted to see Jo hanged, the laws of God
required him to lead the Mormons to build Zion on the American
continent. What set of laws would we expect them to follow.

“11.—This forenoon brother William Law entered into conversation with
the Sheriff upon the illegality of the whole proceedings in reference to
the arrest, when after some remarks from both parties, the Sheriff
acknowledged that he believed Joseph was innocent, and that Governor
Carlin’s course which he had pursued, was unjustifiable and illegal.”

What actually transpired in that exchange is unknown. I can’t imagine a
complete polar opposite shift in the mind of the Sheriff from just one
day prior. He just lost both of his high-level prisoners, went and
threatened Emma and other Mormon elites in order to get them to give up
Jo and Port, all to no avail. He was taking his job seriously and what
stern talking-to awaited him when he returned with a report to Governor
Carlin that Jo and Port had escaped custody? What would Governor
Reynolds of Missouri have to say to the Sheriff when he finds out that
Jo and Port evaded the law once again? His job was likely on the line,
yet William Law talked to him for a few minutes and everything was cool?
Seems a little hard to believe.

Now that Jo was safe on the lam for a minute, he needed to call together
a council of his trusted elites in order to sort out what would be the
next best action to take.

“\[I\] sent word that I wished to see Emma, brothers Hyrum Smith,
William Law and others, with instructions to meet me on the island
between Nauvoo and Montrose. After dark, Emma, Hyrum, William Law,
Newel. K. Whitney, George Miller, William Clayton, and Dimick B.
Huntington, met at the waterside near the Brick Store, and proceeded in
a skiff between the islands, until they arrived near the lower end; and
then hailed to shore. After waiting a very little while, the skiff
arrived from the opposite shore, and in it were myself, and brother
Erastus H. Derby. A council was then held in the skiffs, and various
statements set forth in regard to the state of things. It was reported
that the Governor of Iowa had issued a warrant for my apprehension, and
that of O. P. Rockwell, and that the Sheriff of Lee county was expected
down immediately; very strong evidence was also manifested that Governor
Reynolds of Missouri was not acquainted with these proceedings. That
Ex-Governor Boggs had made oath before a Justice of the Peace, or a
Judge, and that the Judge had made the requisition, and not Governor
Reynolds, also that the writ issued by Carlin was illegal and
unjustifiable. It is absolutely certain that the whole business is
another glaring instance of the effects of prejudice against me as a
religious teacher, and that it proceeds from a persecuting spirit, the
parties having signified their determination to have me taken to
Missouri, whether by legal or illegal means. It was finally concluded
that I should be taken up the river in a skiff, and landed below
\[Ebenezer\] Wiggan’s farm, so called, and that I should proceed from
thence to brother Edward Sayers and there abide for a season.”

After that they decided that nowhere in Montrose or Nauvoo was safe for
Jo. They needed to get him out of town to get him in safe hiding for as
long as possible. Wiggan’s farm was a good point to hold up for a minute
before proceeding on to Sayers’.

How could they do it without attracting the attention of the Sheriff in
town? If he saw anything out of the ordinary, he’d instantly begin
tailing anybody who might lead him to Jo or Port.

A little plan was devised. Jo sent Albert P. Rockwood up the river on
the Nauvoo side to find Wiggan’s farm in the cover of that night.
Jonathan Dunham rowed Jo and Erastus Derby up the river north of Nauvoo.
Albert Rockwood’s task was to find the farm, come to the bank of the
Mississippi, and light two fires as a signal for Jo to disembark. The
plan was carried out that same night, but it wasn’t without its hiccups.
They first came to a place on the river where a fire was lit, thinking
it was made by Rockwood. They were mistaken but luckily the person was
friendly and let them pass along without signaling that he’d found the
fugitives.

Jo, Derby, and Dunham continued up the river until they found the two
fires by Rockwood, and there, Jo found brief refuge on Wiggan’s farm and
made his way to Edward Sayers’ home. This holdup was nice for a minute,
but Jo still had a church and city to run, and thus required meetings
with trusted elites to put his desires into effect. Most important item
on the agenda, get a recognized authority to declare that arrest and
extradition warrants for Jo were illegal. Nauvoo had just passed the
ordinance less than a week prior that we read earlier which granted a
lot of authority for Nauvoo government to declare specific writs and
warrants illegal, but if those continued to be enforced by Governors of
Iowa, Illinois, and Missouri, Nauvoo’s authority didn’t count for much
when pitted against Governors of states and a territory.

To recap, Jo was wanted in two states and a territory at this time and
there were still a number of people in Kirtland who had outstanding
subpoenas to bring Jo in to court for debts he owed. Everywhere Jo had
been for the last decade wanted him behind bars or facing the gallows.
But never forget, it was all religious persecution, am I right?

The Sheriff still thought Jo was hiding out in Nauvoo, not miles up the
river. Jo and friends devised a little plan to lead them to believe he
was no longer in Nauvoo and definitely wasn’t still in the state of
Illinois. A man named William Walker, in conspicuous sight of numerous
people in Nauvoo and the Sheriff who was still trying to find Jo, left
Jo’s house on Jo’s horse and crossed the river to Montrose.

They hoped this would be a clever diversion. What was it a diversion
for? Well, Emma and William Law decided to send two messengers to
Burlington, Iowa, where Governor John Chambers resided, to see whether
or not he had issued a warrant for the arrest of Jo and Port in the
territory of Iowa. This diversion allowed these two messengers to depart
without being noticed and allowed William Clayton and John D. Parker to
slip out of Nauvoo and make their way to Sayers’ to meet with Jo in
hiding.

The Sheriff must have realized it was all a rouse. He remained in
Nauvoo, not crossing the river to attempt finding Jo in Montrose,
because Jo wasn’t there to be found. Instead, he decided on the best
conclusion, tail Emma. Maybe in a day, maybe in a week, he knew that
Emma would leave Nauvoo to visit her husband in hiding. She could lead
him right to Jo.

Emma had been here before though. Her husband had been wanted by a lot
of people many times throughout their marriage, she was smart enough to
know she’d be trailed when she went to meet Jo the next day.

Jo was rightfully scared throughout all of it. His journal reads tells a
bit about the boiling tension. The letter to which he’s referring is no
longer extant so we don’t know the contents, just what Jo reported of
the contents. Of course, he made it seem like Governor Carlin was on his
side in the whole matter, but that was evidently not the case as later
events will attest. Regardless, what the letter did reveal was that the
Missouri officials were nowhere near done.

“This forenoon brother Hyrum received a letter from Elder Hollister at
Quincy, stating that Governor Carlin had said that his proceedings were
illegal, and he should not pursue the subject any further. The letter
also stated that \[Edward R.\] Ford (the agent to receive me from the
hands of the Sheriff, and carry me to Missouri) had concluded to take
the first boat and start home: and that he was going to fetch a force
from Missouri. All this my friends thought was only a scheme got up for
the purpose of throwing us off our guard, that they might come
unexpectedly, kidnap, and carry me to Missouri.”

This agent Ford was ready to serve the necessary papers to Jo and get
him in custody to bring him to Missouri. He was done messing around and
was headed back to Missouri to bring a small armed force to Nauvoo to
affect the arrest.

But Jo needed to see Emma. She decided to take the carriage, but the
Sheriff noticed and immediately began trailing her. But, once again,
this wasn’t the first time this had happened and Emma was smart. Instead
of heading north out of town toward Sayers’ house where Jo was hiding
out, she instead took a little detour to wait out the Sheriff. She went
to Elizabeth Durphy’s house and waited there for a while. But she had a
plan all along to throw the Sheriff off her trail. Once at Elizabeth’s
house, she had William Clayton with another carriage with drawn curtains
pass along the river near Elizabeth’s house. While Emma’s carriage
remained parked in front of Elizabeth’s house and the Sheriff waited
somewhere nearby watching it, Emma snuck out the other side and got in
the carriage brought around by William Clayton. With this little scheme
she was able to pass out of Nauvoo as the evening turned to night
completely undetected.

They took the backroads out of Nauvoo and arrived at the field of
Wiggam’s farm where Emma got out of the carriage and walked the rest
of the way to Sayers’ house where Jo remained in hiding. That night,
while they remained together, some uncomfortable intelligence also came
to Emma and Jo’s attention.

“A report came over the river that ‘there are several small companies of
men in Montrose, Nashville, Keokuk, \&c. in search of Joseph, they saw
his horse go down the river yesterday and were confident he was on that
side. They swear they will have him.”

With the assurance that her husband would be alright and was
sufficiently well-hidden, Emma made her way back to Nauvoo undetected.
The next few days were tense.

That little rouse with William Walker disguised as Jo on his horse
crossing the river threw some people off his trail, but what that did
mean was that they wouldn’t find him and would keep searching. A bounty
of $1300 was placed on his head, which essentially deputized anybody who
wanted to be a bounty hunter to bring him into the custody of the
Sheriff of Adams county, which of course would lead to his transfer to
agent Ford and his extradition to Missouri. Of course, Port was on the
chopping block too, but he was long gone by this time. Besides if you
can disarm the Mormon colossus or take its head off, which option do you
think Governor Reynolds go for? Getting Pistol Packin Port in custody
was a priority, getting Jo in state custody was a necessity.

Jo knew the law was closing in on him and it was only a matter of time
before he fell into custody that he wouldn’t be able to escape from. He
was pushing 4 out of 5 wanted stars here and had to lie low while
somehow keeping the church and city running and keep his followers from
caving to the public pressure caused by the Bennett meltdown. How could
he retain control? Further, with all the new revelations made public by
Bennett, who could he still trust?

Now, I have to say, whenever Jo is chained down to one location away
from his regular daily responsibilities, those are some of my favorite
times in Mormon history. When Jo couldn’t leave the confines of a
building for whatever reason, he wrote. That’s when we get a view into
the mind of Joseph Smith where otherwise we wouldn’t have access to.
Most writings concerning Jo don’t come from him, but from people close
to him and his various secretaries and scribes. Joseph’s own writings in
his own hand are surprisingly few when compared to the mountain of
documentation from people near him. However, while he was in hiding from
the law here in August of 1842, he exchanged a number of letters with
Mormon elites including Emma.

We’ll be spending some time on those exchanges as they provide a window
into the chaos of August 1842. But, before we do, we need to hear a word
from our sponsor this week, 49dollarsites.com

Hey everybody, you may have heard me talk about 49dollarsites before.
What is 49dollarsites.com? Well, Bryce, I’m glad you asked.
49dollarsites is a website of web developers who will create any kind of
website you might need. Now, whether that website is for pleasure or a
hobby, or you need something for your own business 49dollarsites is
where to go. I spent the first three years of this podcast doing my own
website. I don’t have any training in web development aside from a
single semester class in high school and the old website showed just how
adept I was. I signed up with 49dollarsites and had a team member
assigned to make an awesome website. Now, if you go to
nakedmormonismpodcast.com, you can see what it looks like when pros are
put in control of the little stuff. They do hosting and daily backups so
my information is always safe even if my computer here goes down. They
custom-designed everything according to my every neurotic whim, and,
most importantly, the SEOd my site. Now, anytime somebody searches my
name or the podcast, it’s guaranteed that my site comes up long before
any Mormon apologist website who supposedly debunked the podcast.

Here are a few other features that come along with a basic subscription
to 49dollarsites:

Unlimited updates, a contact form, stock images that come included as
part of the subscription, a sleek design created by people who actually
are web development experts, and the most important of all, a website
designed specifically to be optimized for mobile. If your site doesn’t
work on a phone, that’s a lot of lost traffic. 49dollarsites takes care
of that and so much more.

But, listeners of this show, when you sign up with promo code “Naked” at
checkout, you get a free upgrade to the pro package. What do you get
with the pro package? Google analytics, a photo gallery with photo
sliders, promotional pop-ups, google map integration, text animation,
and an entire suite of extra goodies to make your website really
awesome. Just don’t forget promo code “naked” when you check out to get
that free upgrade.

So, if you have a small business, run a podcast, or have any other need
for a website, go to 49dollarsites.com and enter promo code “naked”. Try
it and you’ll regret not signing up sooner.

And now, back to the show…

Jo had to keep everything in check from afar. Here’s the first letter he
wrote to his acting second in command of the Nauvoo Legion, Wilson Law.
He had just been elected as Major-General with the upset in leadership
since the Bennett meltdown. It’s a small window into the mind of Joseph
Smith at this time when he realistically thought he would be captured
and executed. It reads more like the last will and testament of a martyr
than that of a letter of direction. I’ll leave a link to this letter on
Joseph Smith Papers in the show notes.

“[Major Gen.
Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#6688960941220103967)

Dr General—

I take this opportunity to give you some instructions how I wish you to
act in case our persecutors should carry their pursuits so far as to
tread upon our rights as free-born American Citizens. The orders which I
am about to give you is the result of a long series of
contemplation since I saw you.— I have come fully to the conclusion
both since this last difficulty commenced, as before, that I never would
suffer myself to go into the hands of the Missourians alive; and to go
into the hands of the Officers of this state is nothing more nor less,
than to go into the hands of the Missourians; for the whole farce has
been gotten up, unlawfully and unconstitutionally, as well on the part
of
the [Governor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#17474950805639820706) as
others; by a mob spirit for the purpose of carrying out mob violence, to
carry on mob tolerance in a religious persecution. I am determined
therefore, to keep out of their hands, and thwart their designs if
possible, that perhaps they may not urge the necessity of force and
blood against their own fellow-citizens and loyal subjects; and become
ashamed and withdraw their pursuits. But if they \[p. 131\] should not
do this and shall urge the necessity of force; and I if… by any
means should be taken, these are therefore to command you forthwith,
without delay, regardless of life or death to rescue me out of their
hands. And further, to treat any pretensions to the contrary, unlawful
and unconstitutional and as a mob got up for the purpose as religious
persecution to take away the rights of men. And further, that our
chartered rights and privileges shall be considered by us as holding the
supremacy in the premises and shall be maintained; nothing short of the
supreme court of [this
State](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#13915248154212642276), having
authority to dis-annul them; and the Municipal Court having
jurisdiction in my case. You will see therefore that the peace of the
City
of [Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#11141124778422844502) is
kept, let who will endeavor to disturb it. … If there are any threats in
the city let legal steps be taken on the part of those that make the
threats: and let no man, woman or child be intimidated nor suffer it to
be done. Nevertheless as I said in the first place we will take every
measure that lays in our power and make every sacrifice that God or man
could require at our hands to preserve the peace and safety of the
people without colition \[collision?\]. And if sacrificing my
own liberty for months and years without stooping to the disgrace
of [Missouri](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#7545249630230822920) persecution
and violence, and [\[Thomas\]
Carlin](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#4475085799739204151)s
mis-rule and corruption I bow to my fate with cheerfulness and all due
deference in the consideration of the lives, safety and welfare of
others. But if this policy cannot accomplish the desired object; let our
charter, and our Municipality; free trade and Sailors rights be our
motto, and go a-head David Crockett like, and lay down our lives like
men, and defend ourselves to the best advantage we can to the very last.
You are therefore, hereby authorised and commanded, by virtue of the
authority which I hold, and commission granted me by the
Executive of [this
State](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#10477740480338590437),
to maintain the very letter and spirit of the above contents of this
letter to the very best of your ability; to the extent of our lives,
and our fortunes; and to the lives and the fortunes of the
\[[Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#12934140795574369062)\]
Legion; as also all those who may volunteer their lives and their
fortunes with ours; for the defence of our wives, our children, our
fathers and our mothers; our homes; our grave yards, and our tombs; and
our dead and their tombstones, and our dear bought American liberties
with the blood of our fathers, and all that is dear and sacred to man.
Shall we shrink at the onset? No, let every mans brow be as the face of
a Lion; let his heart be unshaken as the mighty oak, and his knee
confirmed as the sappline \[sapling\] of the forrest; and by the voice
and loud roar of the cannon; and the loud peals and thundering of
Artillery; and by the voice of the thunderings of heaven as upon mount
Sinai; and by the voice of the Heavenly Hosts; and by the voice of the
Eternal God; and by the voice of innocent blood; and by the voice of
innocence; and by the voice \[p. 132\] of all that is sacred and dear to
man, let us plead the justice of our cause; trusting in the arm of
Jehovah the Eloheem who sits enthroned in the heavens: that
peradventure he may give us the victory; and if we bleed we shall bleed
in a good cause— in the cause of innocence and truth: and from
henceforth will their not be a crown of glory for us? And will not those
who come after us, hold our names in sacred remembrance? and will our
enemies dare to brand us with cowardly reproach? With
these considerations, I subscribe myself Yours most faithfully and
respectfully with acknowledgements of your high and honored trusts
as [Major
Gen.](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#10644107566869020586) of
the [Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#9832196716840057135) Legion

Joseph Smith— Mayor of the City
of [Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#14864014161319925558)

and Lieut Gen. of
the [Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#9650113489419513128) Legion
of [Illinois](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-wilson-law-14-august-1842/1#1713062121152531079).
Militia

Joseph Smith.—"

This letter had a lot of messages to dissect. Most notably, it instructs
Wilson Law to prepare the Nauvoo Legion for war if the state militias
come into Nauvoo ringing for the prophet. The Mormons weren’t to be
treated in Illinois the way they’d suffered in Missouri, at least they’d
willingly give their lives to not suffer it again. There was a post
script I cut that told Wilson Law to not make public anything he or Jo
communicate to each other during this time, so the Mormons were unaware
that they were to be prepared for battle at a moment’s notice, but Jo
and Wilson Law knew what could happen. That knowledge likely made its
way to the Highest-ranking Mormon elites, especially other Major
Generals of the Nauvoo Legion. (and yes, pedants, that is the proper
pluralization)

Wilson Law received the letter the evening of the 16<sup>th</sup> and
replied the next day under Jo’s directions, making sure nobody was
following the messenger to reveal Jo’s location.

“Lieut Gen. J. Smith

Dear Friend— Every thing is moving along in the city in the usual
tranquil & industrious manner, there is no change in the appearance of
things that a common observer could see, although to one who knows & is
acquaint with the countenances of the thinking few, it is evident that
their minds are troubled more than common, and I know by myself that
they can not help it, and why should it be otherwise when the Lords
anointed is hunted like a Lion of forest by the most wicked & oppressive
generation that has ever been since the days of the saviour of the
world, indeed every movement of this generation reminds me of the
history of the people who crucified Christ, it was nothing but mob law,
mob rule and mob violence all the time, the only difference is that
the Governors then were more just than the Governors now, they were
willing to acquit innocent men, but our Governors now despise justice,
garble and prevent the law, and join in with the mob in pursuit
of innocent blood. I have been meditating on your communication of
yesterday & will just add a thought or so on the subject, respecting
particularly your going to the [Pine
country](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#468030901159008993). I
think I would not go there for some time if at all. I do not
believe that an armed force will come upon us at all unless they get
hold of you first & that we rescue you which we would do under any
circumstances with the help of God, but I would rather do it within the
limits
of the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#9754839073324175103) under
the laws of
the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#320931438554024342),
therefore I would think it better to Quarter in
the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#4486297976517044092) &
not long in one place at once. I see no reason why you might not stay in
safety within
the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#9841192083242625547) for months
without any knowing it only those who ought & that as few as is
necessary.

I must close for the present remaining as ever your affectionate friend
and obedient servant

[Wilson
Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-wilson-law-17-august-1842/1#8074506118797532040). “

Jo was separated from the public, but wasn’t far away. He didn’t know
what conversations were happening in his absence, nor was he privy to
how anxious other Mormon elites, or as Law called them “the thinking
few”, saw the situation. But, even in this time of anxiety and
uncertainty, Jo’s and Emma’s love endured… sort of. After she had
visited and stayed the night, Jo woke up the morning of August
16<sup>th</sup> and took a minute to write to his dear wife. Once again,
the reason I’m reading these exchanges is because they offer a window
into the mind of Jo and Emma which otherwise is completely absent from
the history. Really, history is nothing if we don’t take time to
appreciate the human element when provided the opportunity.

Jo begins by expressing his love and appreciation to Emma for her
visits. After that he goes on to administrative issues communicated to
him concerning the people trying to arrest him, related to him through
some important visitors the night previous. He goes on to direct Emma
with relation to Governor Carlin in Quincy. She must have asked Jo for
leave to plead his case, but Jo wasn’t so certain that Carlin was a
friend. After that he talks about how much the current situation is
really weighing down on his mind. A fair amount of the letter is about
the logistics of how the Smith family would simply disappear west to the
frontier if it came down to it. It almost strikes fatalistic tones.
Understandably, Jo was under a lot of stress, near the end of this
letter he lets that side shine through a little bit.

[Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#11237926016690068668) August
16th. 1842

My
Dear [Emma](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#12546433817286976257)

I embrace this opportunity to express to you some of my feelings this
morning. First of all, I take the liberty to tender you my sincere
thanks for the two interesting and consoling visits that you have made
me during my almost exiled situation. Tongue can not express the
gratitude of my heart, for the warm and true-hearted friendship you have
manifested in these things toward me. The time has passed away since you
left me, very agreeably; thus far, my mind being perfectly reconciled to
my fate, let it be what it may. I have been kept from melancholy and
dumps, by the kind-heartedness of [brother \[Erastus\]
Derby](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#14314968985153070979),
and his interesting chit-chat from time to time, which has called my
mind from the more strong contemplations of things, and subjects that
would have preyed more earnestly upon my feelings. Last night—in the
night—[brother Hyrum
\[Smith\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#14472588722616127085), [\[George\]
Miller](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#9152677669848236057), [\[William\]
Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#11533274196585224191) &
others came to see us. They seemed much agitated, and expressed some
fears in consequence of some manouverings and some flying reports which
they had heard in relation to our safety; but after relating what it
was, I was able to comprehend the whole matter to my entire
satisfaction, and did not feel at all alarmed or uneasy. They think,
however, that the Militia will be called out to search the city, and
if this should be the case I would be much safer for the time being at
a little distance off, untill [Governor \[Thomas\]
Carlin](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#6758637132055988390) could get
weary and be made ashamed of his corrupt and unhallowed pro-ceedings. I
had supposed, however, that if there were any serious operations taking
by
the [Governor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#9371522104164105996);
that [Judge \[James\]
Ralston](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#4109552200269560410) or [brother
\[David S.\]
Hollister](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#7282891221655928162) would
have notified us; and cannot believe that any thing very serious is to
be apprehended, untill we obtain information from a source that can be
relied on. I have consulted wether it is best for you to go
to [Quincy](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#7043087108155626889),
and see
the [Governor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#3402454703028690930);
but on the whole, he is a fool; and the impressions that are suggested
to my mind, are, that it will be of no use; and the more we notice him,
and flatter him, the more eager he will be for our destruction. You may
write to him, whatever you see proper, but to go and see him, I do not
give my consent at present. Brother Miller again suggested to me the
propriety of my accompanying him to the [Pine
woods](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#15147557645648760572),
and then he return, and bring you \[p. 173\] and the children. My mind
will eternally revolt at every suggestion of that kind. More especially
since the dream and vision that was manifested to me on the last night.
My safety is with you, if you want to have it so. Any thing more or
less than this cometh of evil. My feelings and council I think ought to
be abided. If I go to the [Pine
country](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#144834243730945473),
you shall go along with me, and the children; and if you and the
children go not with me, I dont go. I do not wish to exile myself
for the sake of my own life, I would rather fight it out. It is
for your sakes, therefore, that I would do such a thing. I will go with
you then, in the same carriage and on Horse back, from time to time, as
occasion may require; for I am not willing to trust you, in the hands of
those who cannot feel the same interest for you, that I feel; to be
subject to the caprice, temptations, or notions of any-body whatever.
And I must say that I am pre-possessed somewhat, with the notion of
going to the [Pine
Country](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#9570003173033362218) any
how; for I am tired of the mean, low, and unhallowed vulgarity, of some
portions of the society in which we live; and I think if I could have a
respite of about six months with my family, it would be a savor of life
unto life, with my house. Nevertheless if it were possible I would like
to live here in peace and wind up my business; but if it should be
ascertained to a dead certainty that there is no other remedy, then we
will round up our shoulders and cheerfully endure it; and this will
be the plan. Let my horse, saddle, saddle-bags, and valice to put some
shirts and clothing in, be sent to me. Let
brother [Derby](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#15057132042841315007) and [Miller](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#6692934052325555938) take
a horse and put it into my Buggy with a trunk containing my heavier
cloths, shoes and Boots \&c and let [brother \[John\]
Taylor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#2182079186860055352) accompany
us to [his
father](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#10056861176552173817)s,
and there we will tarry, taking every precaution to keep out of the
hands of the enemy, untill you can arrive with the children.
Let [brother
Hyrum](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#7305229532305895848) bring
you. Let [Lorain \[Lorin
Walker\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#16976647203344237351) and [brother
\[William\]
Clayton](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#12498364364173962892) come
along and bring all the writings and papers, books and histories, for we
shall want a scribe in order that we may pour upon the world the truth
like the Lava of Mount Vesuvius. Then, let all the goods, household
furniture, cloths and Store Goods that can be procured be put on to the
Boat, and let 20 or 30 of the best men that we can find be put on board
to man it, and let them meet us at [Prairie Du
Chien](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#17837223498972726781);
and from thence, we will wend our way like larks up
the [Mississippi](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#6364593369976986978) untill
the touring \[towering?\] mountains and rocks, shall reminds us of
the places of our nativity, and shall look like safety and home; and
then we will bid defiance to the world,
to [Carlin](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#541282604944714636), [\[Lilburn
W.\]
Boggs](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#11137819139298677305), [\[John
C.\]
Bennett](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#7944802443908512093),
and all their whorish \[~~whores~~\], and motly clan, that \[p. 174\]
follow in their
wake, [Missouri](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#3464978012218544181) not
excepted; and until the damnation of hell rolls upon them, by the voice,
and dread thunders, and trump of the eternal God; then, in that day will
we not shout in the victory and be crowned with eternal joys, for the
battles we have fought, having kept the faith and overcome the world.
Tell the children that it is well with their father, as yet; and that he
remains in fervent prayer to Almighty God for the safety of himself, and
for you, and for them. Tell [Mother
Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#5311667595418805950) \[Lucy
Mack Smith\] that it shall be well with her son, wether in life or in
death; for thus saith the Lord God. Tell her that I remember her all the
while, as well as Lucy \[Smith Millikin\] and all the rest; they all
must be of good cheer.
Tell [Hyrum](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-to-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#13359587632760027397) to
be sure and not fail to carry out my instructions, but at the same time
if the Militia does not come, and we should get any favorable
information all may be well yet. Yours in haste, Your
affectionate husband untill death, through all eternity forevermore

Joseph Smith

Emma’s reply is very revealing… I’ve cut the little piece about finances
as it isn’t particularly relevant for today.

Dear husband,

I am ready to go with you if you are obliged to leave; and [Hyrum
\[Smith\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#4651261859719240675) says
he will go with me. I shall make the best arrangements I can and be as
well prepared as possible. But still I feel good confidence that you can
be protected without leaving this country. There is more ways than one
to take care of you, and I believe that you can still direct in your
business concerns if we are all of us prudent in the matter. If it was
pleasant weather I should contrive to see you this evening, but I dare
not run to much of a risk on account of so many going to see you…
[Brother \[Erastus H.\]
Derby](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#8513187032732784597) will
tell you all the information we have on hand. I think we ~~we~~ will
have news
from [Quincy](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#1511090771990895153) as
soon as tomorrow.

Yours affectionately forever

[Emma
Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/letter-from-emma-smith-16-august-1842/1#17611635668693336833).

She was ready to go. Come Outer Darkness or the destroyer upon the
waters, Emma was sealed to Jo and ready to fulfill his wishes. She was
smart enough to not be tailed when visiting Jo in hiding and realized
that too many people were visiting him that if she went it would arouse
too much suspicion. This letter exchange exhibits just how much of an
emotional pillar she was to Jo in his times of need. They leaned on each
other in the most dire of times.

The point of it all is that Jo’s power during the Bennett meltdown
rested on a knife’s edge. He had a group of trusted individuals who’d
swore undying fealty to him, then there were the thousands of other
average Mormons who weren’t privy to the information the higher ranks
were. Jo was king.

With all of that considered, what really comprised Jo’s power and
authority? A few thousand people believed he was the mouthpiece of God,
but nobody granted him that status, he just said it enough times that
people eventually said, “okay, yeah, this guy talks to god. Why would he
lie about something like that?”

Somebody in an elected position, or an academic authority in a specific
field, have usually put their lives’ work into gaining that authority.
Millions of people across the planet say that X or Y person is the
president or prime minister of our country because they deserve it. X or
Y have done what it takes to gain the authority of that position and
they reap the power that such authority usually includes. Even then,
it’s up to those millions of people every single day to agree that
person X or Y is deserving of the authority they grant. Without millions
of people in support of them, what power do they truly wield? What
authority do they have when the rest of the world leaders openly laugh
at them and don’t recognize their claimed power? Does their power and
authority continue once they no longer hold whatever position granted
such status?

Jo’s power was so vulnerable in 1842. He was just a guy. He was a guy
who told thousands of people that he deserved authority because he had
power within him that an unseen force had granted, but that wasn’t
exactly testable. It was only the people who believed him that created
the fountainhead of his power. But the dude could have been killed just
like any other person, then what would happen to all that claimed power
and authority? Well, the fountainhead of believers were still there
creating the position of power and authority, it just required somebody
to step up to the plate and claim that they deserved the job.

And really, isn’t that the source of all divides in human cultures? Coup
de tats, groups of people at war, religious schisms… all of these boil
down to a body of benefactors in the form of believers contributing
their fealty to a position or single idea. Then all it takes is a person
coming along and saying they deserve that fealty. There are two sides to
this power dynamic, those who give power and authority, and those who
take it. Needless to say, Jo wasn’t one to leave any power and authority
lying around.

Patreon ad free edition

SE Panel NaMoHE Joseph Smythicism

Sunstone Seattle next weekend 11/17
