---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 119 - Bennett’s Brothel Gets Dumped
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-119-bennetts-brothel-gets-dumped/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-119-bennetts-brothel-gets-dumped
category: History
date: 2018-09-07 05:30:50 +0000
---

Ep 119 – Bennett’s Brothel Gets Dumped

On this episode, we continue rooting around in the muck of the
underbelly of Nauvoo Mormonism. We discuss the primary catalyst that
caused Bennett to be so opposed to Joseph Smith. With rampant rumors of
adultery, Crazy Willey Smith pens “The Truant Husband” with a pleasant
little PSA to all the “midnight watchers” in Nauvoo. We discuss the role
of women’s organizations and the social context in which they rose by
examining Emma’s claims that “Benevolence” societies were corrupt. Then
we get into the seedy and vague history of Nauvoo brothels and
temperance.

Links:

We are Engaged as a Band of Sister by Ruth Alexander  
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/1901529?seq=2#metadata_info_tab_contents>

Ladies Bountiful by Keith Medler  
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/23162952?seq=6#metadata_info_tab_contents>

Relief Society Minute Book  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/1#full-transcript>

Times & Season November 1841  
<https://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/digital/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/9118>

FairMormon Bennett’s Brothel  
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/John_C._Bennett/Brothel_at_Nauvoo>

The Wasp edited by William Smith  
<https://archive.org/stream/TheWasp18421843/The_Wasp_1842-1843#page/n23>

Temple Lot depositions  
<https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=qi5OAAAAYAAJ&hl=en&pg=GBS.PA192>

The Saintly Scoundrel Bennett Timeline  
<http://www.salamandersociety.com/museum/bennett/>

Joseph H. Jackson expose 1844  
<http://www.olivercowdery.com/smithhome/1840s/1844Jack.htm>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Post mo quality of life survey <https://www.soscisurvey.de/qol_survey/>

The great back-stabbing had begun. Everybody was suspicious of their
neighbor. Who would be the next to strike, who would be the next to take
a knife? John C. Wreck-it Bennett’s public and vitriolic opposition to
the leadership in Nauvoo was quickly turning into a meltdown for the
Mormon leadership. Thousands were murmuring about the doctrine of plural
marriage being practiced by select Mormon elites, hundreds had some
evidence to substantiate the rumors, but only a few dozen people were
privy to the knowledge that plural marriage was, indeed, a divine
command of God and was being practiced.

Bennett’s disaffection caused everybody to look at each other with
shifty eyes. Who else was under the guise of sincere belief for the
purposes of exposing illegal church practices? Who could be trusted? Who
would be the next to depart from the highest ranks and stab the brethren
in the back?

The 21 May 1842 wasp summarized it well in a small snippet called “the
shortest way to murder character”. The editor, Jo’s younger brother
Crazy Willey, knew how hard it is to put down rumors once implanted in
the collective consciousness of a society.

“Profess your friendship for a man—tell him how much you love
him—proclaim how many excellent qualities he possesses, and, with a
very sanctified look, and impressive sigh, express your fear that all is
not as it should be. Whisper suspicion, and let conjecture, with giant
strength, work out the ruin\! He who understands human nature in its
deeper workings of damnable cruelty, and selfish artifice, says a
certain shrewd writer, will mark the man who stabs another under the
cloak of pretended affection. The pretence has a lie, adds the, on the
face of it. True affection would never whisper a suspicion, save in the
ear of the one beloved, and whom that suspicion concerned.—Never trust
that man who comes to you whining over his regard for another, while his
tongue is a drawn sword to wound and kill-meet him promptly with the
charge of his hypocracy, and he will sink with meanness before you.”

How could you know? How does a person know when somebody joins their
organization for the purposes of infiltration and exposing what goes on
behind closed doors? How do you tell the difference between pretended
affection and genuine? How could Jo know if the next convert was a
Bennett or a Brigham?

The problem for the men practicing polygamy and trying to keep it under
wraps was largely the women. Funny how that works, you treat half the
population as a commodity subject to your every whim with no legitimate
power to affect change or influence politics and they eventually get
sick and tired of it.

What we’re going to discuss today is a bit of the interplay between the
newly formed women’s organization, the Relief Society, and the
long-standing men’s organization governing everybody, the church
hierarchy. These are our actors for today and the catalyst for conflict
is the same as it’s been for the past few episodes, polygamy. Look, this
podcast is about Mormon history and we talk about issues impacting the
early church as they come along. Polygamy and the accusations of
adultery were completely ruling and shaping every action in the church
in spring to summer of 1842 which means we’ll try and examine it from as
many angles as we can to contextualize the impact of polygamy in 1842.
It’s complex. It can’t be dealt with in an episode or two and then take
a backseat to the historical timeline because polygamy, and the
associated decisions, truly did shape so much of Mormonism in this
Nauvoo era.

What we see play out in the record of public documents is the brethren
leveraging their platforms to try and stifle or control how much people
were talking about polygamy. They wanted the problem to go away. On the
women’s side we have the Relief Society creating a hotbed for these
rumors to circulate and be confirmed. It’s a common anti-Mormon throw
away that Jo preached to the Relief Society that he can only get one
wife while 19 of his wives were sitting in the room, and that’s funny
and it’s a fact and all, but the point is always so much more
complicated than that. By June of 1842, his wives were the President
Emma, Councilor Sarah M. Cleveland, Councilor Sarah Ann Whitney,
Secretary Eliza R. Snow, and the primary movers in the society were
Agnes Coolbrith Smith, passed from Don Carlos to Jo when he died a few
months prior, Zina Huntington, Patty Sessions, and Presendia Huntington
Buell. Those were the main movers and shakers in the Relief Society and
the minutes detail most of them making speeches or proposing motions and
Jo had taken all of them to wife by June 1842.

The Relief Society was created for many reasons. One of those was to
bring the women together into one cohesive body to take care of each
other, and, let’s be clear about this, police each other. When every
single woman in the highest ranks of leadership was one of Jo’s wives
with his first wife as president of the society…. I mean…. that creates
a complex mess of power dynamics I don’t think anybody could reasonably
tease apart.

Let’s start with the messages the brethren were sending to the women in
a few articles printed in the Wasp. The Times and Seasons was the
official church periodical, the Wasp was the independent propagandist
rag edited by Jo’s younger brother, Crazy Willey Smith.

Let’s start with the 21 May issue with an article titled “Wives”:

“Woman should be acquainted that no beauty hath any charms but the
inward one of the mind; and that a gracefulness in their manners is much
more engaging than that of their person; that modesty and meekness are
the true and lasting ornaments; for she that has these is qualified as
she ought to be for the management of a family, for the education of
children, for an affection to her husband, and submitting to a prudent
way of living. These only are the charms that render wives amiable, and
give them the best title to our respect.”

Respect is earned, William Smith, and it’s a two-way street.

The next issue of the Wasp has an article titled “The Wife”. It tells
women what is expected by the man to not break his heart.

“It needs not guilt to break a husbands heart; the absence of content;
the mutterings of spleen, the untidy dress and cheerless home, the
forbidden scowl, and deserted hearth; these and other nameless neglects,
without a crime among them, have harrowed to the quick therefore of many
a man, and planted there beyond the reach of cure the gloom of dark
despair. Oh\! May woman before that sad sight arrives, dwell on the
recollections of her youth and awake and keep alive the promises she
then so kindly gave, and though she may be injured, not the injuring
one—the forgotten, no the forgetful wife—a happy allusion to that hour
of peace and love—a kindly welcome to that comfortable home—a smile of
love to banish hostile words—a kiss of peace to pardon all the past, and
the hardest heart that ever locked itself within the breast of selfish
man will soften to her charins, and bid her live, as she had hoped, her
years in matchless bliss—loved, loving and content—the soother in the
sorrowing hour, the source of comfort and the spring of joy.”

Now, for the crowning jewel from Crazy Willey. This may be one of the
most patronizing and condescending articles I’ve read from a church
article, given the social context from which it was printed. I’ll allow
you to judge it for yourself, it’s titled “The Truant Husband”. This
story really speaks for itself, but I’ll break it up with some of my own
commentary to make it a little more palpable. This reads like Crazy
Willey’s objectified idea of a perfect wife. Remember, Willey was a bit
of a party freak, even moreso than his older brother, Jo, which is
saying something.

“It was past midnight and she sat leaning her pale cheek on her hand,
counting the dull ticking of a French clock that stood on the marble
chimney-piece, and ever and anon lifting her weary eye to its dial to
mark the laps of another hour. It was past midnight and yet he returned
not\!—She arose, and taking up the lamp, whose pale rays alone
illuminated the solitary chamber, proceeded with noiseless steps to a
small inner apartment. The curtains of his little bed were drawn aside,
and the young mother gazed on her sleeping child. What a vivid contrast
did that glowing cheek and smiling brow present, as he lay in rosy
slumber, to the faded, yet beautiful face that hung over him in
tears\!—“Will he resemble his father?” was the thought that passed
for a moment through her devoted heart, and a sigh was the only answer\!

‘Tis his well known knock—and the steps of the drowsy porter echoed
through the lofty hall, as with a murmur on his lip, he drew the massy
bolts and admitted his thoughtless master. “Four o’clock, Willis, is it
not?” and he sprang up the staircase—another moment he is in the
chamber—in her arms\!

No reproaches met the truant husband, none—save those she could not
spare him, in her heavy eye, and faded cheek—yet these spoke to his
heart.

“Julia, I have been a wandering husband.”

“But you are come now, Charles, and all is well.”

And all was well, for, from that hour, Charles Danvers became an altered
man. Had his wife met him with frowns and sullen tears, he had became a
hardened libertine;--but her affectionate caresses, the joy that danced
in her sunken eye, the hectic flash that lit up her palid cheek at his
approach, were arguments he could not withstand.”

So, when your husband comes home at 4 in the morning, don’t you dare ask
questions or he’ll stop loving you. An explanation for Charles’s truancy
is further explained in this lovely little anecdote.

“Married in early life, while he had felt all the ardor, but not the
esteem of love; possessed of a splendid fortune and having hitherto had
the command of his own pleasures, Danvers fell into the common error, of
newly married men—the dread of being controlled. In vain did his
parents, who beheld with sorrow the reproaches and misery he was heaping
up for himself, in after life, remonstrate; Charles Danvers turned a
deaf ear to advice, and pursued with companions every way unworthy of
his society, the path of folly, if not of absolute guilt. The tavern,
the club-room, and the race-course, too often left his wife a solitary
mourner, or a midnight watcher.

Thus the first three years of their wedded life had passed—to him in
fervid and restless pleasure, to her in blighted hope or unmurmuring
regret. But this night crowned the patient forbearance of the neglected
Julia with its just reward, and gave the death blow to folly in the
bosom of Danvers. Returning with disgust from the losses of the hazard
table, her meekness and long suffering touched him to the soul, the film
fell from his eyes, and Vice, in her own hideous deformity, stood
unmasked before him.”

Poor Charles Danvers, just lost all his money at the gambling tables in
the local tavern, feels controlled by his wife, pushed into a marriage
he didn’t want at the advice of his parents, only wanting to be a free
spirit. But, lucky for him, when he gets home at 4 in the morning to his
sleeping sick child and wife who’s been awake all night waiting for him
to return, she doesn’t ask any questions or try to find out where he’s
been, like a good wife in the spirit of meekness and affection. She
doesn’t even ask if he’s gambled away all their money again or where
they’ll get their next meal, she just gives him a tearful hug and is
glad that he’s home. God knows if she complains that he’ll just leave
her and the kids because he feels too controlled, so it’s definitely in
her best interest to bite down on that unruly member of a tongue and
never speak ill of her husband. Julia is such a model wife. Happily for
everybody, her not asking questions of her husband worked out for
everybody…

“Ten years have passed since that solitary midnight, when the young
matron bent in tears over her sleeping boy. Behold her now? Still in the
pride of womanhood, surrounded by their cherub faces, who are listening
ere they go to rest to her sweet voice, as it pours forth to the
accompaniment of her harp an evening song of joy and melody; while a
manly form is bending over the music page to hide the tears of happiness
and triumph that spring from a swelling bosom, as he contemplated the
interesting group.”

The article concludes with a nice little PSA for all the young matrons
out there looking to chastise their husband should he return at 4 in the
morning without explanation.

“Youthful matrons\! Ye who watch over a wandering an erring heart—when a
reproach trembles on your lips towards a truant husband, imitate Julia
Danvers, and remember, though hymen has chains, like the sword of
Harmodius, they may be covered with flowers; that unkindness and
irritability do but harden if not wholly estrange the heart—while on the
contrary, patience and gentleness of manner (as water dropping on the
flinty rock will in time wear it into softness,) seldom fail to reclaim
to happiness and virtue, the Truant Husband.”

Yeah, it speaks for itself standalone, but when you consider the context
of all the rumors gripping Nauvoo at the time and the brethren
constantly putting out fires, it takes on a new dimension. Beyond that,
I can’t say that this is something which was published in direct
response to Bennett scandal currently under way, because that article
honestly could have been printed just about anywhere in the country at
this time, and, quite frankly, there are plenty of articles and stories
like this printed every day and broadcast to millions of people at the
click of a button. The inherent sexism within the story is worth
decrying on its own merits and it’s a shame I can’t even say that this
was a product of the time.

The important piece is the context during which this story was printed.
This reads like a snuff piece. Wives, stop asking your truant husbands
all those probing questions or he’ll stop loving you.

Let’s shift our focus, because I don’t want you all to come away from
today’s episode with wrong impressions. Let’s hone in on the Relief
Society for a minute here and it’s role in Nauvoo Mormonism.

In spite of the way I’ve painted it this far, in many ways Nauvoo was a
weird experimentation of early women’s rights. Let me qualify that a bit
because everything I’ve said today so far makes it sound like it was
created for the sole purpose of shutting up those wives who couldn’t
keep their mouths shut about polygamy. That is laughably reductionist
and simplistic, so let’s discuss the Relief Society in light of women’s
rights movements of the day within Nauvoo Mormonism. On the one hand,
Nauvoo was only able to survive with the contributions by the women and
their untiring devotion to the cause and providing for the destitute
Mormons in their times of need. One partial reason the Relief Society
was formed was as a kind of reward for doing so much to build Zion in
their own way. Look, these women had been building Zion in ways we can’t
imagine within the confines of their gender roles society had dictated.
Sure, the major structural pieces of construction projects were carried
out largely by the men cutting lumber and stone, firing bricks,
everything you can imagine to get a structure built. But once the
structure was up, it was just a skeleton of a building. Who do you think
built a ton of the furniture and upholstered it, sewed rugs and
curtains, designed the interior to look the way it was. Who do you think
kept all the thousands of men and children fed during all these
construction projects? Who was tending to small farming operations and
taking care of livestock while the men were occupied with construction?
Sure the men usually farmed the cash-crops, but small gardens and
private farming operations? Who educated all the kids? Laundry was a
multiple day’s-long chore, who did all of that amidst cooking and
child-rearing duties and was then expected to have a fresh loaf of
cornbread and stew in the fireplace when daddy comes home from building
temples all day? Yeah, women in Mormon history were the unseen force
that kept society afloat. Maybe it was time they finally have some power
and say in what happens.

After years of contributing to the collective Mormon effort, the Relief
Society was formed which granted women the ability to meet together and
lobby their efforts as a cohesive singular group. They could finally
work together in solidarity and meet with the prophet and his wife on a
weekly or semi-weekly basis to voice concerns, or talk about what’s been
going on in Nauvoo lately. For a few hours a week they could get away
from the kids and husband and all the never-ending chores to just hang
out with friends, and be a support group for each other. What an
incredible thing, right? Truly, this was progressive for its day. I
can’t stress that enough, women’s organizations were a revolutionary
time in American history, and Nauvoo Mormonism was part of the movement.

Now let’s view this revolution in the broader context. A few women’s
organizations existed at the time. Let’s use the complaints Emma voiced
in the first Relief Society meeting to put the Relief Society in its
time and place of American history. Emma’s criticisms of the naming
stood as important criticisms of many of the women’s societies of the
day.

When Jo and John Taylor were trying to name the Relief Society the
Nauvoo Benevolent Society, Emma’s objections revealed these criticisms
of women’s organizations of the day that I’m talking about.

“Emma Smith, said the popularity of the word benevolent is one great
objection—no person can think of the word as associated with public
institutions without thinking of the Washingtonian Benevolent Society
which was one of the most corrupt Institutions of the day—do not wish to
have it call’d after other Societies in the world--.”

It can’t be argued that these benevolence societies, or the Relief
Society when it comes to Mormonism, weren’t beneficial in so many ways.
The subject is really complex. They accomplished social change at the
behest of groups of women, a phenomenon which had never happened in
western history before, with a few minor exceptions.

Ruth Alexander wrote of the importance of the benevolence societies as a
social safety net in the 1840s and 50s. This article is titled “we are
engaged as a band of sisters” class and domesticity in the Washingtonian
Temperance Movement 1840-1850, and you’ll find a link in the show notes.

“Throughout the winter and spring of 1842, the women of the Ladies’
Chelsea Temperance Benevolent Society visited the houses, alleys, and
streets of their Manhattan neighborhood searching for families and
individuals who suffered from the ravages of alcohol. Led by
“Directress” Bowrason,… The Chelsea devotees of the Washingtonian
temperance movement offered cash, clothing, and the message of
abstinence from alcohol to impoverished inebriates. Among those aided
were three women “restored” to sobriety by the actions of the female
Washingtonians. The first woman was destitute, drunk, “nearly naked,”
and “sick from exposure” when members of the society found her. She was
persuaded to take the pledge of total abstinence, food and medical care
were provided for her, and society members helped her find employment
and board. Later she became a “worthy member” of the organization. The
second, a young woman who was destitute and “without friends,” took the
pledge and was clothed, boarded, and assisted in obtaining work with a
sympathetic family. The third, a mother so poor and drunken that local
authorities had taken her children from her, was able to resume care of
her family after receiving help from the Washingtonian women.”

Ruth Alexander further sums up the benefits of these societies and
social movements fostered within them, including the temperance
movement, as follows:

“Feminine modesty, charity, the “rescue” of destitute or degraded
females, and attentiveness to the reform of personal habits, all evident
in the report from the Ladies’ Chelsea Temperance Benevolent Society,
were common features of the reform efforts spearheaded by middle-class
women during the nineteenth century… Numerous historians have asserted
that this enthusiastic activism was inspired in part by middle-class
women’s adherence to the tenets of domesticity—an ideology that sharply
differentiated the “public” world of men from the “private” world of
women and yet ultimately prompted many matrons to take their message of
moral probity into the temperance, moral reform, antislavery, and
woman’s rights movements.”

Another historian by the name of Keith Melder articulates the rise of
women’s benevolence societies and notes how difficult it is to chart
their rise. Most of these benevolence societies were formed to increase
circulation of Bibles and inter-faith proselytization to Native
Americans, a common sentiment shared by the majority of Protestant
Christian sects in early America. The unwashed Native required
conversion to Christianity to complete the colonialization of the
American continent, so people like Joseph Smith wrote books about their
supposed Christian heritage in hopes of converting them. However,
Christianizing the Natives was a dogmatic ideology long before Jo was
even born. These female bible benevolent societies contributed in ways
we can’t imagine to help with those missionary efforts.

From Melder’s Ladies Bountiful: Organized women’s benevolence in early
19<sup>th</sup>-century America:

“The missionary impulse spread quickly into New York state where the
Female Missionary Society of the Western District, organized in 1816,
maintained six missionaries and raised more than $2,000 in the year 1818
from 46 towns and villages in ten counties. The religious crusade
stimulated the growth of centralized, nonsectarian, national
organizations dedicated to the circulation of Bibles and tracts, and
many women’s societies became affiliates of the national groups. New
Hampshire’s female Bible societies numbered 138 local groups at the
height of their activities in 1828. In 1817 the managers of the American
Bible Society paid tribute to their lady assistants:

‘It would be an act of injustice to that sex who contribute so
essentially to the relief of our cares, whilst they heighten our purest
pleasures, not to notice, in a prominent manner, their active
benevolence in aid of the Society no only in forming Auxiliaries, but
also in constituting, in so many places, their Pastors Members for life.
They thus manifest the sense which they cherish of their obligations to
that holy volume, whose truths have elevated them in Christian lands to
their just and all-important station in society, and qualified them to
perform the duties of that station with honour and success.’”

With that societal context in mind, let’s consider what Emma said about
other benevolence societies. She said that the Washingtonian benevolence
society was one of the most corrupt institutions of the day. Women
represented a major untapped bloc of social power. Women’s role in
politics until 1920 was the values she raised her male children with who
would vote on her behalf once he reached voting age. However, voting is
just one aspect of social power. It turns out that organizing
grass-roots social movements was something women were really good at
doing in 19<sup>th</sup>-century America. These groups took on social
issues of the day, mostly temperance as it was the most prominent issue
which impacted so many women on a day-to-day basis. Beyond the social
movements though, these societies offered that intangible sense of
sorority and cohesion in a world where women had no power to directly
affect social change through voting. They also provided times when the
women could leave the kids with her husband and just go hang out with
all her friends away from all the annoyance of children, husbands, and
the daily grind of chores to distract them.

It is interesting to note that the organization of the Female Relief
Society in Nauvoo was formed in a similar fashion as other female
societies of the day, that is by the approval and dictates of the ruling
brethren in the area. I mean, the FEMALE RELIEF SOCIETY was only formed
when Joseph Smith and John Taylor gave their approval and ordained the
women there to be in charge of the society. Taylor even tried to name it
contrary to what the president of the Relief Society wanted it named and
she had to debate him to get it named Relief Society instead of the
Benevolence Society of Nauvoo.

Once the group was formed, it was kept on a short leash by the Mormon
leadership. Almost every meeting of the society for the first few months
had a keynote speech by Jo or another high-ranking Mormon like Father
Newell Whitney or Heber the Creeper Kimball. Either that, or Jo would
have Emma read out a statement to the women that he’d prepared. Sure,
the women controlled what happened in these various societies, including
the Nauvoo Relief Society, but they were usually forced to run
everything through local male leadership. Beyond that, if any of the
societies wanted to affect societal change that ran against the will of
local churches or governments, what could they do? If these female
societies opposed any powerful male societies, who do you think usually
won that debate?

Nevertheless, female groups did represent opportunities to curry women’s
favor in a given demographic, which made the societies vulnerable to
being coopted by local politicians or religious leaders. That Female
Missionary society Melder talked about was able to raise $2,000 in a
year’s time from 46 villages and townships, all from women who wanted to
spread the Bible to the unwashed Natives. That’s a lot of dough from a
large swath of land all funneled through a group advocating for social
changes, run exclusively by women, that mass of untapped social and
voting power.

Any politician worth their salt would recognize the utility or,
conversely, danger of such a cohesive group of women devoted to social
change. Women’s societies had to be kept on a short leash or they might
actually accomplish something counter to what the powerful men wanted.
It was this constant interplay between men’s and women’s societies.
Beyond that, corruption inevitably seeped its way into most of these
organizations. Imagine that, money and absolute power corrupt
absolutely, it’s a phenomenon that unfortunately transcends all races,
genders, and cultures.

However, even with the short leash granted by the brethren, it didn’t
stop the Nauvoo Relief Society from causing change in their own ways.

Case in point; Bennett’s brothel. John C. Wreck-it Bennett owned a
brothel in Nauvoo. A man with his knowledge of intoxicating herbs
usually on hand in brothels, obstetrics, and salesmanship, along with a
set of morals that were always for sale to the highest bidder, few men
in Nauvoo were better suited to own and manage a brothel than Bennett.

Now, the historical record of this house of ill-repute are scant to say
the least. In a city championing piety to any outside observers, to have
a public brothel definitely didn’t help with circulating rumors of
rampant adultery and sexual experimentation within Nauvoo’s city walls.
As Bennett’s public persona began waning in early 1842 amidst these
rampant adultery rumors, eventually the Mormons could no longer deal
with having a permanent-standing brothel in town right next to one of
their meeting-houses, they eventually acted. We can be sure the
newly-formed Relief Society played a major role in what transpired.

Before we get to that, a question exists here. Let’s see if we can play
around with this question for a few minutes. How was a brothel able to
operate in Nauvoo? Why was it allowed in the first place? This is
actually a really good question to ask those believing loved ones
because it’s really unconventional and it doesn’t deal with the typical
points of argumentation about the Books of Mormon or Abraham or Polygamy
or something to that effect. This is just pure logic and facts to come
to some uncomfortable possible conclusions and can be reached via
Socratic method. So, how was a brothel able to operate in Nauvoo? Let me
walk you through why this is a fun line of questioning to broach with a
believing loved one and arm you with the facts to feel comfortable
having that conversation should the situation present itself.

Joseph Smith was the sole leader of everything in Nauvoo. The only
person with a higher government office than him was John C. Bennett
prior to his resignation in May 1842, but Jo held the highest
ecclesiastical position in the church and his will became law. This was
the structure of the Nauvoo government since the elections held in
February 1841:

Mayor John C. Bennett, Councilors: Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney
Rigdon, Charles C. Rich, John Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith,
John Greene, Vinson Knight and aldermen: William Marks, Samuel H. Smith,
Daniel Wells, and Newel Whitney. Daniel Wells is the only non-Mormon in
that group, but he was a Jack-Mormon and simply keeping up appearances.
He was the token non-Mormon who was extremely friendly to Jo and the
Mormons. All church authority rested in the hands of Joseph Smith as
prophet, seer, and revelator and every member of the Nauvoo government
looked to Jo for direction. All public works projects were divinely
commanded by god through his self-proclaimed prophet. Nothing happened
in Nauvoo without the knowledge and approval of the Mormon mob boss, Don
Joseph Smith. Beyond that, he was Lieutenant-General of the Nauvoo
Legion so anything he couldn’t accomplish by government or divine
dictate, the Nauvoo Legion or local police force would handle the
problem, often under the cover of nightfall. Jo was the sole authority
running Nauvoo. So, if he was the pious prophet of God as so often
asserted by the believer or apologist, why did he allow a brothel to
exist in the city? Why didn’t he stop it from opening? Or, if he didn’t
know about it, when he eventually did learn of its existence, why didn’t
he immediately close it?

Here’s a set of historical facts you need to know if a conversation does
happen to spawn from this line of questioning. The timing on all of
these facts is important as is the source from which the information
derives, so hang in there with me for a few minutes while I create a bit
of a timeline in discussing the vice-ridden underbelly of Nauvoo.

When the Charter was passed in late 1840, a temperance bill was argued
soon after which banned the sale of non-medicinal alcohol within the
city limits. In response to the passage of this bill, action was taken,
published in the Times & Seasons on 15 November 1841. Bennett was in
good-standing in the church at this time, living in a room of Jo and
Emma’s house and regarded as Jo’s closest bosom-friend at the time,
having long since replaced Sidney Rigdon who’d replaced Oliver Cowdery.
Here it is:

“The Neusance.—It is known to many of our patrons, that a certain young
man very injudiciously, and contrary to the remonstrancies of his
friends, and in violation of the ordinances of this city, not long since
erected a small building, near the Temple square, avowedly for the
purpose of transacting the business of a Grocer. Said building was for a
short time occupied for that purpose; but so heavy did the frown of
public disapprobation rest upon it, that it was finally vacated, and
stood some time, a lonely wreck of folly. In the mean time, the very
sanctimonious and *extremely unfortunate* Mr. Kilbourn of Montrose,
threw out to the public, ungentlemanly and slanderous imputations
concerning the matter, saying that the Presidency of the church abetted
and approbated the concern, \&c., and the building having become a
monument for every fool to write upon and exhibit his folly, to the
annoyance of the citizens, the City Council very judiciously ordered the
building removed as a neusance.—Some opposition to the execution of this
order was exhibited, and the authorities called out a few of the
military and demolished the building. The city authorities manifest a
determination to carry out strictly the temperance ordinances of the
city, and in this we wish them “God speed.” We suppose however, that
Kilbourn and his junto will bray worse than ever, and “Mormonism” be
adjudged by “witch law:” “Take the accused, bind him head and foot, and
cast him into the pool; if he stinks and drowns he is innocent, if he
floats take him out and hang him or burn him with fire.” We say, let the
poor fools judge till they themselves are overtaken by judgment, and let
them bray till they burst their wind chests.”

Grocers in 19<sup>th</sup>-century terminology basically meant a store
for alcohol of all sorts and tobacco and other psychoactive herbs, not
what we consider grocery stores today. A grocer near the temple violated
the city temperance ordinances Bennett so vociferously fought to put in
place because he was a teetotaler, probably because it was popular with
the ladies and he was an insufferable ladies’ man. The article
specifically claims that it was because of the temperance ordinances
that the building was declared a neusance and destroyed.

We’ll get into this in a minute, but this establishment has been falsely
conflated with Bennett’s brothel by historians before. Most notably,
Richard Price’s book *Joseph Smith Fought Polygamy* is a bit reckless
with the timing here, but we’ll get into that soon.

What is most notable is that Bennett’s brothel actually was destroyed.
This is how it happened. There was a resolution passed on May 14, 1842,
a month and a half before Bennett started his crusade against Jo and the
Mormons, but he’d begun his departure. He resigned less than a week
after this resolution from the office of Mayor and he’d basically
already tendered his church membership resignation by this point.

HoC Vogel edition 5:8

“I attended city council in the morning, and advocated strongly the
necessity of some active measures being taken to suppress houses, and
acts of infamy in the city; for the protection of the innocent and
virtuous, and good of public morals; showing clearly that there were
certain characters in the place, who were disposed to corrupt the morals
and chastity of our citizens, and that houses of infamy did exist: upon
which a City Ordinance concerning brothels and disorderly characters was
passed, to prohibit such things, and published in this day’s Wasp.

I also spoke largely for the repeal of the Ordinance of the City
licensing Merchants, Hawkers, Taverns and Ordinaries, desiring that this
might be a free people and enjoy equal rights and privileges, and the
Ordinances were repealed.”

Here’s the Wasp article referred to:

“An Ordinance concerning brothels and disorderly characters.

Sec 1<sup>st</sup> Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Nauvoo, that all brothels or houses of ill fame, erected or being in the
City of Nauvoo, be and the same hereby are henceforth prohibited and by
law declared public nuisances and that the owners or keepers of such
houses, be fined in a sum of not less than five hundred nor more than
fifty thousand dollars & imprisoned for, six months for each offence of
one days continuance of such establishment; and that any person
frequenting such establishment, (except on lawful business) shall be
fined in the sum of five hundred dollars, and six months imprisonment
for each offense; and further, that for ever act of adultery, or
fornication, which can be proved the parties shall be imprisoned six
months, and fined, each, \_\_\_ the sum of from five hundred to fifty
thousand dollars, and that the individuals own acknowledgement shall be
considered sufficient evidence in the case.

John C. Bennett, Mayor

Approved May 14<sup>th</sup>, 1842”

Approved by John C. Wreck-it Bennett, and then he walked out of the
meeting with his middle fingers flying and as soon as he got home he
wrote down his resignation from the office of Mayor. I mean, not quite
that literal, but pretty close. This was Bennett’s last order as Mayor
of the city of Nauvoo, an ordinance commanding brothels and houses of
ill-fame to be disbanded or destroyed, and the owners fined five hundred
to fifty thousand dollars. No evidence is readily avaliable of whether
or not Bennett paid a fine for being the owner of such a business, but
it was passed and his brothel was immediately destroyed. Beyond that, in
the same meeting this ordinance was passed, Jo was able to repeal the
temperance ordinances on the city as well. Bennett’s and Jo’s
relationship, whatever was left before that council meeting, completely
melted down in that meeting. Oh, to be a fly on the wall to see that
argument play out. Bennett’s power had been completely neutered by Jo
and the temperance order his fought for so hard and the brothel he’d
built as a successful business, all undone in a single meeting. No
wonder he hated Jo so much. Jo was a total power-hungry bastard and he
flexed his muscles in this meeting.

Details of the destruction of Bennett’s brothel are unfortunately weak
in the historical record. Bennett was so quickly scrubbed from the
historical record in any way possible that as soon as he left the Mormon
community he largely departed from the collective memory of most Mormons
at the same time. His contributions to the movement and foundation of
Nauvoo have been effectively minimized since mid-1842, but some details
did come to light, and here they are.

During the temple lot hearings in the mid-1890s, a man named John
Taylor, not the Brighamite prophet John Taylor, he was dead by the
1890s, a different John Taylor of the RLDS sect, told a few details of
the Nauvoo brothel that he recalled from his teenage years. This account
comes as a court testimonial, so that’s good, but it’s nearly 50 years
after the fact from a believer in Mormonism who saw Bennett and the
Fosters as mortal enemies of Joseph Smith for their respective roles in
destroying his character. Bennett for his expose and lecturing against
Mormonism and the Fosters for their role in publishing the Nauvoo
Expositor which led to the death of Joseph Smith. Here’s Taylor’s
testimony, it’s a bit biased:

“I stated that at one time I watched John C. Bennett go into a house
that had a bad reputation, and I reported that fact when I caught him.
That was in the year 1842; sometime in the latter part of the season.
John C. Bennett and a lot of them built an ill-fame house near the
Temple in Nauvoo, and there was a meeting ground in the grove near
there. After they had built it, John C. Bennett and the Fosters,--I knew
all their names at the time, they were the head men of it,--after they
got it built, they wrote on it in large letters what it was,--a sign
declaring what it was, and what it was there for; but I don’t remember
just what the inscription or sign was they put on it. When we went to go
to meeting we could not get there without passing this house and looking
right at it, for it was close to the meeting ground, and one or two
thousand people would go there to meeting on a Sabbath and they didn’t
feel very good seeing that house there with great big letters facing
them when they would look at it.”

Once Bennett became the problem he was, the citizens of Nauvoo lobbied
to have the house of ill-fame removed. According to the timing claimed
by Taylor almost 50 years after the fact, this would have been a few
months after the formation of the Female Relief Society. Should his
timing be accurate, this may have been one of the first projects the
women banded together to accomplish for understandable reasons. Maybe
they were sick of too many nights of a truant husband. We’ll discuss the
limitations of Taylor’s testimony momentarily. This was how the citizens
of Nauvoo dealt with Bennett’s brothel.

FX NEEDED

Building crashing into gully  
struggle of a fight  
kicked-in door  
noisy mob rabble rabble rabble background  
thump  
creaking and stuff putting building on rollers

“The City Council held a council over it, and they considered it was a
nuisance to the city, and the authorities passed an ordinance against it
and notified them to move the nuisance; but they did not pay any
attention to the order. They had some furniture in it, not much; the
police gathered around, (NOISY MOB BG) and one of the policemen went to
go in to move some of the furniture or something that was in it, and
John Eagle, a big, burly looking fellow, (STRUGGLE AND WHACK ON HEAD)
hit the policeman and knocked him down (THUMP). They went in, and took
the building, and put it on rollers (CREAKING AND STUFF); and there was
a deep gully there, and they pitched the house into it (BUILDING
CRASHING)—just rolled the house off and tipped it over into this gully,
shingles and all, and that was the end of that transaction.”

That’s all the historical record has to offer us concerning Bennett’s
brothel, at least all I could find, there’s inevitably more out there
that I couldn’t find, I need to be clear about that. Let’s evaluate how
valuable this testimony is. It’s fun, right? Taylor knows how to tell an
exciting story from his memory, but is it trustworthy?

As stated earlier, it was given 50 years after the occurrence. Beyond
that, Taylor went on in the same statement to claim that Joseph and
Hyrum were never practicing polygamy which perjured himself on the
stand, casting his entire testimony into serious question. Also, he was
a staunch believer in Joseph Smith as the prophet and his son, Joseph
III as the current prophet, and Taylor likely could never see any
possible wrong Jo could have done, much like the majority of believers
throughout ALL of Mormon history. His religion, the RLDS, had a vested
interest in proving that Jo was a monogamist as the majority of
scholarship falling on that side of the spectrum has come out of the
RLDS tradition. That reveals a religious conflict of interest with
respect to him making certain claims or interpreting certain evidence in
a way which would not be critical to Joseph Smith, which further limits
his credibility. The timing is also an issue. He claimed it happened in
the latter part of 1842 when Bennett was doing his lecture circuit
against the Church, but there doesn’t exist any article in the Times and
Seasons or HoC that I can find which alludes to this specific instance
happening in late 1842 when they supposedly tossed Bennett’s brothel
into a ditch. In fact, there isn’t any article detailing the destruction
of a building of ill-fame except in November of 1841, and that was a
grocery store selling alcohol against city regulations, not a brothel.

That’s the only article that even close to fits the bill for what John
Taylor claimed in the temple lot hearings concerning a house of
ill-fame. However, the timing of that November 1841 article is
problematic as Bennett was still in good-standing with the church in
November of 1841, even if there happened to be murmurings of problems
that wouldn’t fully gestate until April and May of the next year when he
resigned. However, the location fits in general terms, both Taylor’s
testimony and the November 1841 article claim the building in question
was near the temple. But that’s the only point where there’s agreement.

Also, the 1841 article makes no mention of a police officer being
assaulted as Taylor had claimed. The article also says the building had
been erected and then vacated, which may be a euphemism for it being
inhabited only by those people of ill-fame who would need such a house,
but that’s only inference and it’s speculative at best. Beyond that, the
article says it was a Mr. Kilbourn who owned the grocer, and there’s
nothing tying Bennett to it whatsoever that would link this article to
the testimony given by Taylor in the temple lot hearings.

So, did Bennett own a brothel with a big XXX sign on it right next to
the temple that was pitched into a gully when the ordinance banning
brothels was passed? It’s pretty likely. He had all the skills and
know-how to create a successful sex-work business and he had the
obstetrics skills necessary to keep the women in working order…. (Hmmmm…
kinda gave myself a little shudder at that thought.) But, should
Taylor’s testimony be granted as historical fact, no. There’re just
too many holes and conflicts of interest for it to be trustworthy.

The limitations in Taylor’s testimony hasn’t stopped historians from
using it as historical fact.

If you read the 2 FairMormon articles concerning Bennett and his
brothel, they link the 1841 article and Taylor’s testimony together and
claim it was Bennett who opposed the removal of the building in the 1841
article. Beyond that, they also cite an article out of the Wasp for Oct
2, 1842 as substantiation that Bennett owned the building, that it was a
brothel, and that he opposed its removal. Well, there was no issue of
the Wasp on Oct 2, 1842, and the Oct 1 and Oct 8<sup>th</sup> issues
don’t have any articles of the sort. I know… because I read them. What
I’m saying is that FairMormon has these articles online with shoddy and
dishonest historical practices and citations that are either
misinterpreted or simply don’t exist when you chase them down. Always
check your sources, folks.

Now I know most of you must be balking at the idea of FairMormon using
shoddy scholarship, how dare I lob such accusations. Honestly though,
it’s important on this subject. I’ve been digging for quite some time
and Bennett’s brothel is a subject that’s not so open and shut. But why
is it important? Why is this a line of questioning to try and broach
with that believing loved one at family reunions?

This reveals a seedy underbelly of Nauvoo history that isn’t the
kinderhook plates or the book of Abraham or the masonic initiation
rituals that are fun. This is something on a completely different level
and it reveals a bit of the human element within the story. Tensions had
been building between Jo and Bennett for a couple months prior to what
happened with Bennett’s brothel, this was the final straw. This went
down 5 days prior to Bennett’s resignation from the office of Mayor and
membership in the church. The passage of this resolution must have
driven that final ax blow that finally rent the trunk of their
friendship in twain. Bennett was so viciously opposed to alcohol
consumption and was probably making a bit of money off his spiritual
wife business in that brothel, and in one fell swoop Jo outlawed
brothels and repealed the temperance ordinances making the sale of
alcohol legal again.

But it goes so much deeper\! This was passed on the same day Orrin
Pistol Packin’ Porter Rockwell returned from Missouri after having shot
ex-Governor Lilburn Boggs. Port wasn’t motivated by nice possessions or
a lavish lifestyle, he was a mountain-man motivated by freedom. If there
was one thing that motivated ol Port, it was whiskey. Whiskey was
expensive and hard to get in a city with temperance laws. Well, Port had
just returned from fulfilling prophecy in Missouri, maybe Jo owed him a
favor to make whiskey a little easier to obtain.

But there’s another level of historical conjecture to get into here. So
much of the argument between Jo and Bennett wrapped around the problems
created with Bennett’s spiritual wifery system, as opposed to Jo’s
celestial marriage system. Look, Bennett owning a brothel and making
money off sex-workers is something we can talk about. There’s a lot of
factors that play into it. Commodifying sexual pleasure is something
humans have been doing for as long as we have written history. But I
want to draw a line between Jo and Bennett here when it comes to the
commodification of women and sexuality in Nauvoo.

Bennett was gaining money off sex-workers… what was Jo gaining from his
sex-workers? The story of the Kimball family is heart wrenching. We’ll
get into the details in an episode when our timeline gets there, but
essentially Jo told Heber the Creeper Kimball that Jo wanted Heber’s
wife, Vilate, as a celestial wife. They toiled over the decision for a
few days and finally came back and said they’d do it and Jo told them he
was just joking, he actually wanted their 14-year-old daughter, Helen
Mar. He gained a 14-year-old victim and the undying fealty of his
closest followers by commodifying the Kimball family’s sexuality. Heber
was handsomely rewarded with 43 wives before his death, many of those
were Jo’s wives after he died in 1844. What else did he gain? Well, more
women with his “Mothers in Israel” who would coerce younger girls into
marrying Jo. And let’s not be too hasty in thinking Jo just took these
women for his own possession and that was the extent of their sex-work
services. A visiting dignitary came into town, send him over to one of
the rooms of the Nauvoo Mansion and all his worldly lusts will be
satisfied. Let’s hear how Jo treated his wives and what he’d get them to
do according to Joseph H. Jackson’s account:

“Joe's conduct with the women of Nauvoo, surpasses every thing in
blackness that I have ever heard or read of. I have from his own mouth,
and from the mouth of his victims, statements which I dare not reveal;
for the world will not believe that such corruption could possibly
exist. Yet, if protection could be afforded to some of those females who
were the victims of these wretches (the leaders in Nauvoo,) I could, I
believe, from their own mouths, procure confessions that would startle
the world. I have visited frequently, those women whom Joe supported for
the gratification of his lust -- I have found them subsisting on the
coarsest food, and not daring to utter a word of complaint, for they
feared Joe Smith more than they did their God. I have appealed to the
finer feelings of their nature, and seen them weep as children, when
dwelling on the degraded state to which their credulity had reduced
them. Knowing me to be in the confidence of Joe, they hesitated not to
unfold their griefs to me, but their neighbors and acquaintances
generally, know nothing of their feelings or their degradation. These
remarks apply only to a portion of the spiritual wives, for there are
many who are as corrupt as Joe himself…

But to return to my conversation with Hyrum. After giving me his
experience in the spiritual wife system, he urged me to take a few
women, and named two or three whom he said would suit me. I thanked him,
and said I had no desire to form any connection with any women in the
city, but if I should change my mind I would give his choice the
preference, in part…

I asked him how he would work the matter; to which he replied, that he
had only to tell certain of his spiritual wives, that such a man had
been in the Missouri war, and that he should be put out of the way, and
his properly and money consecrated to the use, of the church; then said
he, it is d--d easy for them to got into his good graces, and to mix a
white powder with his victuals, and put him out of the 'way. I then told
him that he ought to give me the names of these women, as they might be
of great service to me in carrying his secret measures. He then went on
to give me the names of women, who he said would go to the ends of the
earth for him; but I shall not in this place disclose them.”

Who’s more evil here, Bennett making money off sex-work, or Jo building
a debased and corrupt system of theocratic power by leveraging his
sex-workers? Bennett sold the sex services of his spiritual wives to
satisfy lusts, Jo gave the services of his wives and concubines to men
as a favor. And, well, I think Marlon Brando captures it pretty well…

Godfather

Everything we’ve discussed today is one tiny window into Mormon history
that reveals a dark and malevolent side of Joseph Smith. Sure, we can
throw shade at Bennett’s spiritual wife system all day, but it seems
Bennett got out of the game at a good time. I think Jo scared Bennett
the longer they spent together. I think that just like Joseph Jackson,
the more Bennett was able to see this darker side of Jo, the more he
realized the type of depraved and hideous villain he was working with.
Bennett saw the blueprints and piles of parts lying around behind closed
doors that would eventually comprise Jo’s second Revolutionary war
machine.

So, maybe this isn’t a subject to bring up to that family member the
next time you get in a conversation about the church. Maybe this isn’t a
fun line of questioning to walk people down, there be monsters down this
rabbit hole. But I think it does reveal aspects of the human condition
that exist ubiquitously throughout all human history across all human
cultures. Aspects we don’t want to talk about; we don’t want to
acknowledge because it might be our neighbor, a friend, a family member,
or a trusted religious leader who’s just the nicest guy you’ve ever met.
A religious leader who could do no wrong. Sound familiar, anybody?
