---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 124 - BM pt 4 Polygamy Post-Bennett w/Johnny Stephenson
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-124-bennett-meltdown-pt-4-polygamy-post-bennett-wjohnny-stephenson/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-124-bm-pt-4-polygamy-post-bennett-wjohnny-stephenson
category: History
date: 2018-10-11 16:00:00 PDT
---

Ep 123 – BM pt 3 Polygamy Pre-Bennett w/Johnny Stephenson

On this episode, we’re joined for part 1 of Johnny Stephenson’s
interview on Mormon polygamy. We cover a brief overview of Jo’s sexual
escapades prior to 1842 and the evolution of the doctrine of polygamy
through Kirtland, Missouri, and into Nauvoo.

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Ep 124 – BM pt 4 Polygamy Post-Bennett w/Johnny Stephenson

On this episode, we’re joined for part 2 of Johnny Stephenson’s
interview on Mormon polygamy. Bennett’s expose printed in the Sangamo
Journal, and later History of the Saints, altered Mormon polygamy from
that time forward. Johnny walks us through how the expose affected the
doctrine of polygamy and gives us a few insights into the real-world
impact of practicing celestial marriage using first-hand accounts.

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Johnny Stephenson pt 2

C:

That’s it for the conversation with Johnny Stephenson. I want to thank
him again for coming on and bringing so much data to the table, y’all
should have seen his nearly 200 pages of notes he compiled in
preparation.

On a closing note, long-time listeners will recall when I had Will
Bagley on last July, I split the patreon dollars with him for those
episodes and introduced a new program I’d like to continue to do as much
as possible in the future. If people are willing to come on this show
and share research they’re working on or have published, those patreon
dollars are up for grabs.

Why am I doing this? Alright folks let’s talk money, often an
uncomfortable subject for many. I make a thrifty living from this
podcast and it’s by your generous support that I’m able to do so. For
that I dearly thank you.

I don’t want those dollars to stop with me. That’s why I use a small
portion of those patreon dollars to donate to people and causes I think
are worthwhile. I donate to a number of podcasts and bloggers to help
keep them alive and support the content creation with more than just
hitting the download button. I also support the Freedom From Religion
Foundation, the Newspapers Archive Project, Wikipedia, the Salt Lake
Tribune, and I just signed up to support Sunstone monthly because they
lost a significant benefactor after they permanently banned somebody who
conducted himself questionably towards another female panelist. Some of
you may have received an email stating Sunstone needs donors and I can
live without that $10 a month by cutting back from 3 to 2 pots of coffee
a day.

The truth is, that tired old adage is true, money makes the world go
‘round, and it can often be a sensitive subject. Another harsh truth,
there’s not much money in Mormon history\! Almost every single Mormon
history professor job ever in the world has been through BYU, and the
Mormon history book audience is niche to the point of near asphyxiation,
especially for critical works. That means that if you don’t teach
American history with a minor in religious history, or don’t work for
the Church’s own various history departments, you don’t have a career in
Mormon history. Think of how that professional and academic bias has
skewed the entire realm of Mormon history and the available books. With
only a handful of notable exceptions, and by that, I mean an actual
handful, like single digits numbers of historians, almost every
historian publishing critical Mormon history does so as a hobby, and
many of them only can do that hobby once they’re retired and can devote
the time to citizen-history instead of their career. Additionally,
pre-internet the Church controlled almost every document ever used to
construct models of Mormon history.

That means an institution currently with unlimited resources has
controlled the narrative and the documents for almost all of Mormon
history, and it’s a complete vacuum of resources for historians who are
critical. I write Mormon history in an accessible format, but that’s all
based on work historians have done. These people dig through all the
documents and come to logically sound conclusions then I bring those
conclusions to all of you. That’s how the mechanisms work behind the
scenes at Ground Gnomes studios.

This show is hosted by a toddler in Mormon history standing on the
shoulders of warriors who’ve been working tirelessly and thanklessly for
decades to bring truth to light. This show wouldn’t exist if not for the
guests I’ve interviewed and historians who I someday hope to interview,
along with organizations that foster academic and open discourse on the
subject like Sunstone, Dialogue, and the John Whitmer Historical
Association.

That’s a window into the battlefield from where I’m sitting, and I’m
only an ensign in the war. Your support on patreon.com/nakedmormonism is
one way I can attempt to funnel resources where lacking, and arm
independent historians as they rewrite a narrative that’s been so
overwhelmingly biased and even dishonestly fabricated for 180 years, all
because it’s been almost exclusively controlled by a wealthy institution
with vested interests. Nothing will make this sharp divide more stark
than when we get into the Utah years.

With all of that said, Johnny Stephensen asked me to donate his cut of
the patreon dollars for his two episodes to another historian. BYU and
Joseph Smith Papers Project historians will never want for food or
raiment. Your patreon dollars are going straight to supporting
independent historians who are woefully underfunded in comparison to
church historians.

I think it’s important to be transparent about these issues, even if
they’re uncomfortable. If you want to help fund more research in Mormon
history, and have it accessibly communicated on this podcast, consider
pledging, I’ll do my best to stretch your dollars beyond supporting
myself to fund people and foundations that actually are making a
difference in this niche little field. Also, if you’re a Mormon history
researcher of any kind and want to share some relevant research on the
show, or if there’s a particular author you’d like to see on the show
who would make a great interview or needs recognition, please let me
know at <nakedmormonism@gmail.com>.

With that said, thank you so much for listening and for your support.
Also, and a huge thanks to Julie for keeping the social media lights on
in my absence. Give her a follow @TheRealEmmaHale.

IHTTAYNTHOTNMP.
