---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 86 - Talos’ Temple Crown
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-86-talos-temple-crown/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-86-talos-temple-crown
category: History
date: 2018-01-19 05:53:00 +0000
---

1/18/18

Ep 86 – Talos’ Temple Crown

On this episode, Jo and friends have been busy for the first week of
April 1841. We examine Jo’s enclave of Nauvoo through the eyes of the
most pressing business to be handled through the April General
Conference. Rigdon steps aside to make room for John Wreck-it Bennett to
be Jo’s left-hand man, the magnitude of the Nauvoo Temple project is
realized, and the leadership fills the pesky vacancies in the Quorum of
the Twelve and other prominent leadership bodies left by the deaths of
David Patten and others. After that we jump into a new segment to talk
about the larger scope of Mormon prophetic succession practices in light
of the new leadership called to fill the vacancy left by Thomas Monson’s
death.

Links:

Hiram Abiff  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hiram_Abiff>

Mormon history timeline  
<http://www.exmormon.org/mhistory.html>

D\&C 124  
<http://comparedandc.com/>

Book of the Law of the Lord  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/the-book-of-the-law-of-the-lord/1#historical-intro>

Baptism for Dead  
<http://lds-church-history.blogspot.com/2012/04/rebaptism-feb-2-1841-tuesday.html>  
<https://mormonitemusings.com/2017/10/05/origin-of-the-baptism-for-the-dead-doctrine-2/>

April 1841 Conference  
<http://mormon-church-history.blogspot.com/2010/08/mormon-history-between-apr-6-1841-and-9.html>

Hyrum Smith  
<https://religion.byu.edu/news/hyrum-smith-papers>  
<https://www.geni.com/people/Hyrum-Smith/6000000000927483227#/tab/timeline>  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/hyrum-smith>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

April of 1841 was abnormally busy for the Mormons and Joseph Smith.
April 5<sup>th</sup>, Jo was sealed to his first polygamist wife in
Nauvoo, Louisa Beaman, April 6<sup>th</sup>, the cornerstone ceremony
for the Nauvoo Temple was held with the Nauvoo Legion out in full force,
parading around town, and the rest of the week was soaked up by a major
conference held after the 11<sup>th</sup> anniversary of the foundation
of the Church of Christ. We’ve been covering certain aspects of this
week for a number of episodes. Episode 77 was all about the Temple
dedication ceremony, and from there back to episode 74 we’ve hit on
small elements that are all congregating on this week in Mormon history.

In episode 74, we covered a significant portion of D\&C 124, which was
the first canonized revelation given in Nauvoo. It was a motherlode of a
revelation, comprised of 145 verses in today’s D\&C, and it touched on
the creation of a number of committees, organizations, and specific
directives for certain members of the Mormon elite and what they should
do with their personal wealth. In that episode, we briefly touched on
some reorganization of the leadership, so I’ll refer you back to 74
titled Foster Pulls a Pistol on Joseph Smith for a bit of backstory
concerning what we’re about to discuss.

The church operated in semiannual blocks in Jo’s day, and to a certain
extent it still does today. Whenever organizational changes or General
Authorities are added or taken away from the Q70s up, the changes happen
in the background all year, but are solemnized and created as church
record in April and October during General Conference. For the second
segment of this episode we’ll be discussing what this means in context
of today’s church leadership and how it slightly differs from how Jo
initially organized his hierarchy. The point is, in Jo’s church,
leadership changes were called for and voted on during April and October
conferences which lasted much longer than the weekend conferences that
are held today.

The leadership in Nauvoo had been in a constant state of flux since the
Mormons began moving into the Illinois area en masse from late 1838 on
to where our historical timeline currently resides. The April 1841
conference included a lot of business from the previous 6 months which
needed to be voted on and set into stone. We’ll be discussing a number
of prominent names in this episode. With very few exceptions, these
names will be the same names which constituted the leadership of the
church when Jo and Hyrum were assassinated in June of 1844. I can’t
stress enough how important many of these people were in the early
church history, and we’re not even discussing the Quorum of the Twelve
in large part today. We’ll be primarily focusing on the elites in
Nauvoo, as the Q12 had yet to make it back to the states from their
missionary trip in Europe.

We’ll spend the historical portion of today’s episode reading the
minutes from the April 1841 conference. You guys must be fellow
historical masochists like myself to find joy and pleasure in reading
conference minutes, or else you wouldn’t be here. So, let’s dive right
in and see what information can be garnered from this one conference
spanning 5 days.

Beginning Wednesday, 7 April 1841, the conference convened in Nauvoo.
The meeting was called to order and a dedicatory prayer was offered by
William Law. The conference began with a powerful oration by Joseph
Smith, recounting the struggles and prosperity of the Saints in every
place the church had expanded to by that point.

Beginning on page 334 of V. 4 of the Dan Vogel History of the Church
source and text critical edition, Jo begins by taking stock of the land
and human resources the church had and had recently acquired. How great
was the shadow cast by Talos?

“It is with unfeigned pleasure that they have to make known the steady
and rapid increase of the Church in this State, the United States, and
Europe. The anxiety to become acquainted with the principles of the
gospel on every hand is intense, and the cry of ‘come over and help us,’
is reaching the elders on the wings of every wind; while thousands who
have heard the gospel, have become obedient thereto, and are rejoicing
in its gifts and blessings. Prejudice, with its attendant train of
evils, is giving way before the force of truth, whose benign rays are
penetrating the nations afar off.

The reports from the Twelve Apostles in Europe are very satisfactory,
and state that the work continues to progress with unparalleled
rapidity, and that the harvest is truly great. In the Eastern States the
faithful laborers are successful, and many are flocking to the standard
of truth.

Nor is the South keeping back. Churches have been raised up in the
Southern and Western States, and a very pressing invitation has been
received from New Orleans, for some of the elders to visit that city;
which has been complied with. In our own state and immediate
neighborhood, many are avowing their attachment to the principles of our
holy religion, and have become obedient to the faith.

Peace and prosperity attend us; and we have favor in the sight of God
and virtuous men. The time was, when we were looked upon as deceivers,
and that Mormonism would soon pass away, come to nought, and be
forgotten. But the time has gone by, when it was looked upon as a
transient matter, or a bubble on the wave, and it is now taking a deep
hold in the hearts and affections of all those who are noble-minded
enough to lay aside the prejudice of education, and investigate the
subject with candor and honestly. The truth, like the sturdy oak, has
stood unhurt amid the contending elements, which have beat upon it with
tremendous force. The floods have rolled, wave after wave, in quick
succession, and have not swallowed it up.”

From there Jo goes on to publicly declare that members of this church
will be famous to their posterity as Saints of God and virtuous men if
they just suffer for a bit longer in this mortal coil. After that he,
once again, praises the state legislature for incorporating Nauvoo and
granting such a liberal charter to the Mormons. He goes on to iterate
the importance of building the Nauvoo temple stating:

“In consequence of the impoverished condition of the Saints, the
buildings which are in course of erection do not progress as fast as
could be desired; but from the interest which is generally manifested by
the Satins at large, we hope to accomplish much by a combination of
effort, and a concentration of action, and erect the Temple and other
public buildings, which we so much need for our mutual instruction and
the education of our children…

We would call the attention of the Saints more particularly to the
building of the Temple, for on its speedy erection great blessings
depend. The zeal which is manifested by the Saints in this city is,
indeed, praiseworthy, and, we hope will be imitated by the Saints in the
various stakes and branches of the Church, and that those who cannot
contribute labor will bring their gold and their silver, their brass and
their iron, with the pine tree, and box tree, to beautify the same.

In conclusion we would say, brethren, be faithful, let your love and
moderations be known unto all men; be patient, be mindful to observe all
the commandments of your Heavenly Father, and the God of all grace shall
bless you. Even so. Amen.”

Jo was no Hingepin Sidney Rigdon when it came to oratory, but he could
rile up a crowd for general conference pretty well. Rigdon made a good
mentor when it came to public speaking. With Jo’s speech and exhortation
out of the way, the brethren could finally get to the necessary business
they were there for in the first place.

First, let’s talk about one of the most important items of business in
this conference, the Nauvoo Temple. From 339 of the Vogel HoC vol 4:

“President Joseph Smith made some observations respecting the duty of
the several quorums, in sending their members into the vineyard, and
also stated that labor on the Temple would be as acceptable to the Lord,
as preaching in the world, and that it was necessary that some agents
should be appointed to collect fund for building the Temple.

Resolved that John Murdock, Lyman Wight, William Smith, Henry W. Miller,
Amasa Lyman, Leonard Soby, Gehiel Savage, and Zenos H. Gurley be
appointed to travel and collect funds for the same…

The building committee were called upon to address the assembly. Elder
Cahoon spoke at length on the importance of building the Temple, and
called upon the Saints to assist them in their great undertaking. Elder
Alpheus Cutler made some very appropriate remarks…”

The Mormons simply cannot function without the need to build a temple,
and their fixation with the Nauvoo Temple served to be one of their
greatest challenges. But you gotta admit, a Mormon colossus donning the
modern-day Nauvoo Temple as a crown with tens of thousands of Mormons
trailing in the wake of destruction would surely put the fear of God in
the hearts of every damn Mobocrat and government official who dare
oppose the will of the prophet.

Speaking of those who opposed or fell in line behind the prophet, we can
see a brief window into somebody stepping aside when they were unable to
fulfill their duties. I don’t think there’s any way to know exactly what
happened behind the scenes with the next passage we’ll read, I don’t
know exactly whose idea it was, but I know the effects of this decision.

The Temple dedication ceremony the previous day apparently took its toll
on Hingepin Rigdon who had been in a very fragile state since his time
in Liberty Jail during the winter of 1838-39. He decided to yield his
position of third in command to Joseph to John C. Wreck-it Bennett.

From 336 in the Vogel HoC:

“President Rigdon arose and stated that, in consequence of weakness from
his labors of yesterday, he would call upon General John C. Bennett to
officiate in his place.”

Wreck-it Bennett was happy to hold the position of third in command to
Jo while Rigdon recovered. I don’t know if Jo told Rigdon at some point,
“Hey, look, you’re not feeling well, just give your seat up to Bennett,
he’ll keep it warm for you while you recover, then he’ll give it back as
soon as you ask for it.” Maybe Rigdon was fed up with Jo and was looking
for his first possible out and used Bennett as his exit strategy. I
don’t know how to interpret this, and I don’t think there is truly a
way for historians to know for sure. Regardless of the inciting incident
that put Wreck-it Bennett on Jo’s left hand, Bennett took to his new
office like a trilobite to water.

“Gen. Bennett then read the revelations from “The Book of the Law of the
Lord,” which had been received since the last General Conference, in
relation to writing a proclamation to the kings of the earth, building a
Temple in Nauvoo, the organization of the Church, \&c…

General Bennett read the charters granted by the Legislature of this
State, for incorporating “the City of Nauvoo,” “The Nauvoo Legion,” “the
University of the City of Nauvoo,” “the Agricultural and Manufacturing
Association,” and “the Nauvoo House Association.”

On motion, resolved that the charters now read be received by the
Church.

Carried Unanimously…

General John C. Bennett then spoke at some length on the present
situation, prospects, and condition of the Church, and remarked that the
hand of God must indeed be visible, in accomplishing the great blessings
and prosperity of the Church, and called upon the Saints to be faithful
and obedient in all things, and likewise forcibly and eloquently urged
the necessity of being united in all their movements; and before he sat
down he wished to know how many of the Saints, who were present, felt
disposed to continue to act in concert, and follow the instruction of
the First Presidency; and called upon all those who did so, to arise on
their feet—when immediately the Satins, almost without exception,
arose.”

Look, these are the only surviving minutes from this meeting. But, given
the general tenor and mood of the Saints from their independent
reminiscences and journals, early Nauvoo years were a time of great
apostasy to counterbalance the overwhelming zeal. There were plenty of
members and even a few elites who weren’t quite so excited about
everything they’d suffered through in the moves from Kirtland and
Missouri, and needless to say, some murmurings, even among the Mormon
elite, could be heard whispered over the silence of supplication to the
Lord.

Previous to this, all major motions undertaken by the High Council
required a vote of unanimity, but when conflicts between certain members
of church leadership reach critical mass, a unanimous vote on anything
becomes increasingly impossible. Jo responded by changing the voting
requirements with the following proposition:

“President Joseph Smith declared the rule of voting to be, a majority in
each quorum; exhorted them to deliberation, faith, and prayer; and that
they should be strict and impartial in their examinations. He then told
them that the presidents of the different quorums would be presented
before them for their acceptance or rejection.”

After that it lists each presidency and the quorum they represented with
Newell Whitney presenting the First Presidency of the Lesser Priesthood,
President John A. Hicks presenting the Elders’ Quorum, Joseph Young
presenting the Quorums of Seventies, Don Carlos Smith presenting High
Priests’ Quorum, and Elias Higbee presenting the High Council. Each of
the constituent presidents over each quorum voiced their accordance with
the ruling body of the First Presidency comprised of by Joseph and Hyrum
Smith, and Wreck-it Bennett as acting president until Hingepin Rigdon
had recovered. Each president voiced their intention to fall in line
behind the presidency, but then each group of presidents were presented
to the bodies whom they represented to be sustained as the presidency of
each respective quorum.

The bodies rejected a number of the participants and Bishop Newel K.
Whitney moved their cases to be tried before their respective quorums at
a later time. We’ll see if these various presidencies were ever
successfully challenged, but I have my doubts as the names listed seem
to be generally in line with how the presidency existed in Nauvoo at the
time of Jo and Hyrum’s deaths, with a few minor exceptions of course.

Then the leadership decided to handle some business it had been putting
off for quite some time by April 1841. Maybe you remember Captain
Fearnought who recklessly charged into battle on Crooked River back in
October of 1838 in Missouri before being shot by the Missouri militia
and dying an excruciating death hours later…

From 338 of Vol. 4 Dan Vogel HoC:

“President Smith observed, that it was necessary that someone should be
appointed to fill the quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the room of the
late Elder David W. Patten; whereupon President Rigdon nominated Elder
Lyman Wight to that office; which was unanimously accepted. Elder Wight
stated that it was an office of great honor and responsibility, and he
felt inadequate to the task; but inasmuch as it was the wish of the
authorities of the Church, that he should take that office, he would
endeavor to magnify it…

Resolved that James Allred be appointed to the office of High Councilor,
in the place of Charles C. Rich, who had been chosen a Counselor to the
President of this stake, and that Leonard Soby be appointed one of the
High Council, in the room of David Dort, deceased.”

And just like that, General Lyman Wight, a Mormon elite from many moons
ago was given the office of apostle in the place of a deceased man from
the 1838 Mormon war in Missouri. Other vacancies were filled and some of
the leadership was put on notice for not falling perfectly in line with
the elite leadership.

So much of church organization had been a patchwork mess of disparate
revelations and pieces hastily woven together to form some kind of
coherent body. With each person passing away in the early Nauvoo years,
and there were a lot of deaths leading to this point, each death popped
another hole in the fragile tapestry.

It was only fairly recently that Jo had replaced most of the patchwork
with a single revelation cobbling so much together, but each dissenter,
of which there were plenty, tore away a little piece as they left,
making the entire safety net of governing power held by the church look
more like thinly sliced pieces of swiss cheese hurriedly sown together
at the edges.

If you’re going to rule the world one day, you need a solid set of rules
and loyal followers who will follow every word you say, as if it came
from god himself. Who could Jo trust the most to never betray and always
be loyal? D\&C 124 offers some important insight. This revelation was
read to the rest of the council and governing bodies of the church
during this April conference, most of the information in it was already
known, but there was some interesting information couched in the pages.

From D\&C 124 starting vs. 15-16

“15 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum
Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart,
and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord.

16 Again, let my servant John C. Bennett help you in your labor in
sending my word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand by you,
even you my servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of affliction; and his
reward shall not fail if he receive counsel.

91 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, let my servant William be
appointed, ordained, and anointed, as counselor unto my servant Joseph,
in the room of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the
office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his
father, by blessing and also by right;

92 That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal
blessings upon the heads of all my people,

93 That whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall
be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.

94 And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet,
and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant
Joseph;

95 That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; and that he
shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto him
the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same
blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of
the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver
Cowdery;”

This was Jo’s way of elevating his brother, Hyrum, to the level where he
and Hyrum were essentially equals. He also endowed Hyrum with the power
of patriarchal blessings, which only Joseph Sr., BDC, had done before
his death back in late 1840. Now Hyrum and Jo were equals with Hyrum
having the power of Patriarch of the church. This was the main problem
when it came to the succession crisis after Jo’s death, he’d named
upwards of 11 people to be successors, but Hyrum was the only one with
an office equal to Jo and he should have been the right successor. But,
Hyrum and Jo died at the same time, so any plans to have Hyrum be the
Prophet Seer and Revelator upon Jo’s death were destroyed and too many
questions were left behind. This revelation, D\&C 124, was voted on and
received as church canon at this April conference amidst all the trouble
with evaluating loyalties of the various groups of leadership.

Stick around till the end of the episode to hear more on Hyrum Smith.

After this April 1841 conference, Jo had a few important pieces in
place. The church had voted to accept the Nauvoo Charter and all
associations and committees it created. They had a plan to collect money
to finally get to work on the Nauvoo Temple, and now Hyrum was upgraded
from being Jo’s shadow to being his right-hand man. Both would continue
to rule the church as equals from this time forward. Jo had plans for
the control panel and a copilot he could trust. On paper, Talos is
starting to look pretty good.

HelloFresh

From time to time, we run into a Mormon headline that’s too important or
just too good to pass up. With a podcast devoted to Mormon history, it’s
hard to jump back and forth from the 1800s to the modern day and keep
everything straight. In light of the pressing need to discuss these
stories and examine the impact they have on broader Mormonism, we’re
debuting a new timetravelling segment called:

Mormon Chronopod

With the assumed risk of making this episode obsolete as soon as it hits
the RSS feed, today we’re going to examine what’s going on with the
leadership of the Brighamite LDS Church in January of 2018 with the
death of President Thomas Monson. On Tuesday, 16 Jan, the Church held
two separate press conferences a mere hour apart. Both were held to
announce Russell Nelson’s ordination to the office of Prophet, Seer, and
Revelator. He’ll be sustained to the position in the upcoming April
General Conference, barring sudden death or mental incapacitation.

As it’s modernly practiced, when the new prophet comes into office, his
first action is to name his councilors. For the majority of the
20<sup>th</sup> and 21<sup>st</sup> century, the two councilors are
retained when the new prophet takes office, with a few notable
exceptions. There is no divine decree explaining why the new prophets
usually retain the old councilors, but it’s been the status quo for
about a century so there is definitely precedent. The main reason, of
course, is to have a smooth transition of leadership when the head
honcho dies.

The average chapel-attending Mormon today won’t know the history of
succession crises which have gripped the church since Bloody Brigham
Young took the office. Most Mormons think that the system in place today
of seniority rule is the same system which designated Brigham as the one
true prophet after Joseph’s death. As with everything in Mormon history,
the simplistic definition is, at best, woefully lacking, and at worst
grossly inaccurate bordering on dishonest.

Let’s use our ­­­­­­­­­Mormon Chronopod to take a trip through Mormon
history from the late 1840s to modernity in order to understand
prophetic succession in context.

First off, Brigham Young crafted a coup when Jo died. We’ll get there in
our historical timeline, but Brigham shouldn’t have been prophet for the
main reason that nobody should have been prophet because Jo never
bothered to designate one beyond his brother, Hyrum, who died the same
day Jo did. The main point to take away here is that Jo always thought
Mormonism would be a dynastic legacy, each generation being ruled by his
descendants. Almost all of the Smith brothers were dead when Jo and
Hyrum were shot and Joseph III wasn’t even a teenager yet, so Brigham
slipped right into the vacuum left behind by Jo and took half the
Mormons out to Utah away from the remaining Mormon churches in the
Midwest.

Once Brigham took office he proceeded to rule for around 40 years.
During Brigham’s reign in Utah, he put 3 of his own sons into the Q12.
One of his sons, John Willard Young, was only 11 years old at the time
he received his endowment and induction into the Quorum of apostles. It
was very much in Brigham’s mind that Utah Mormonism would be a dynastic
legacy as well. However, when Bloody Brigham croaked, much like his
friend Joseph Smith, he didn’t leave any clear succession mechanisms in
place either. It was clear that Brigham didn’t want Orson Hyde or Orson
Pratt taking the mantle as he’d kept them on nearly seamless mission
runs since they moved to Utah. Had Brigham’s Mormonism followed today’s
rule of seniority, Orson Pratt or Orson Hyde were the last surviving
apostles from the Jo Smith era, making them the rightful successors.
Brigham wanted a son to rule, but they were overruled with infighting
from other holdouts from the Jo days. It was left to John Taylor,
Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow to fight among themselves and the
rest of the Q15 for who the rightful successor would be.

John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff ended up being the next prophets,
somewhat organically evolving the seniority principle along the way.
However, both of them also put their sons into the Quorum of apostles,
likely with hopes that the Mormon church would be ruled by the Taylor or
Woodruff dynasties. The office of Prophet and President of the LDS
church, as it wasn’t a massive corporation at this time, was in a state
of flux. There was a 3-year break of infighting between Brigham and
Taylor before any consensus could be reached to elect Taylor. There was
a 2-year break between Taylor and Woodruff for the same reasons among
many other issues causing infighting like the first manifesto. Woodruff
died in 1898, but during his entire presidency, Lorenzo Snow was working
with the Q15 to curtail infighting and streamline the process of next
president. Remember, Lorenzo Snow was one of the few remaining holdovers
from the Joseph days who still lived in Utah at the end of the
19<sup>th</sup> century, along with his first counselor, George Q.
Cannon.

Lorenzo Snow was an important prophet, even though he only spent from
Sept 1898 to Oct 1901 as prophet, he retained George Q. Cannon as First
counselor until his death in April 1901, at which point he promoted
Hyrum Smith’s son, Joseph F. Smith from Second to First Counselor, and
called Rudger Clawson as the new Second Counselor. The succession time
from Woodruff to Snow was the first nearly seamless transition of less
than one-months’ time, whereas it had been multiple years of fighting
before any successor was named prior to Snow’s reign.

All the work Snow put in to create a streamlined succession process paid
off with the election of Joseph F. Smith to office of prophet and
president. Joseph F. Smith, descendant of Hyrum Smith, nephew of the
founding prophet of the religion, wanted a dynastic rule and put his
son, Joseph Fielding Smith into the Quorum of Apostles. Joseph Fielding
Smith would be the only descendant of a prophet to become a prophet in
the Brighamite LDS Church.

Following Joseph F. Smith’s death, Heber J. Grant seamlessly took the
office of Prophet and ruled from 1918 to 1945. After Joseph F. Smith’s
reign, George Albert Smith, a descendant of Joseph Smith’s cousin who
was in Zion’s Camp back in 1834, took the office. He wasn’t very stable.
He suffered from bouts of anxiety and depression. J. Reuben Clark and
David McKay who were First and Second counselors to George Albert Smith
essentially ran the Church when Smith was out for medical reasons.
George Albert Smith passed away and David McKay took over the mantle of
prophet naming J. Reuben Clark as his Second counselor. Clark took the
office of first counselor in June 1959 when Stephen Richards died, and
Hugh B. Brown was called as second counselor to McKay in 1961. Hugh
Brown ascended to first counselor in 1963 with the death of Henry Moyle,
and N. Eldon Tanner was called to Second Counselor.

Out of all the names discussed so far, Hugh B. Brown stands out as a bit
of an anomaly. He was a liberal democrat in a largely conservative
religious organization during the height of the civil rights movement.
Hugh B. Brown viciously opposed the priesthood ban on blacks and thought
the brethren would lift the ban in 1969 but was resoundingly proven
wrong. Since his passing, a letter correspondence has emerged showing he
had a number of faith crises, but still continued to follow the
brethren. Hugh Brown was largely opposed by the rest of the Q15, he had
very few friends in the group. One of his most vociferous enemies was
Harold Lee, soon to be designated prophet. David McKay passed away in
January of 1970. Joseph Fielding Smith, son of previous prophet Joseph
F. Smith, grandson of Hyrum Smith, was next in line, but he was also 93
years old and in terrible health. Hugh B. Brown voiced his concerns that
Joseph Fielding Smith shouldn’t be named as next prophet as he was in no
condition to serve as prophet and president.

Due to his advocation for giving African-Americans the priesthood and
his opposition to Joseph Fielding Smith being named prophet, Hugh B.
Brown was the first member of the first presidency to not be retained
when the new prophet took over since the reign of Joseph F. Smith in
1901 when he let go of Rudger Clawson. This was a major slap in the face
of Hugh Brown. He was fit for his office, never had any issue with
fulfilling his duties, but because of politics and infighting between
him and Harold Lee among others, he was booted. He was the snowflake in
a boardroom filled with firebreathing conservative sharknadoes of
bigotry. Brown served the remainder of his apostleship in disgrace,
never holding a prominent position beyond standard Q12 after that until
his death. The political issues with Hugh Brown being let go from the
presidency sparked some interesting discussions which evolved into later
discussions had by Spencer Kimball and his Q15 to eventually lift the
priesthood ban. The ban was lifted a mere 3 years after Brown’s death,
so he never saw the church espouse his personal morality before his
death. What a perfect fuck-you to one of the few people talking sense to
the rest of the brethren at a time when they needed it the most. If they
would have listened to Brown’s counsel, BYU would never have been
boycotted, the Sao Paolo Brazil temple never would have been in
jeopardy, and the church’s tax-exempt status never would have been
threatened. Brown was basically defaced in the standard chapel-attending
Mormon household from that point on.

Brown’s insight into Joseph Fielding Smith being unfit for service
wasn’t treated very well either, even though he was right. Joseph
Fielding Smith was given the office of prophet from Jan 1970 to July
1972, for most of it he was never seen and was bed-ridden. His duties as
prophet fell directly to Brown’s most vicious opponent, Harold Lee, and
N. Eldon Tanner. After Smith’s death in 72, Lee took the mantle naming
Tanner and Marion Romney as his first and second counselors. Lee ran the
church as president for a year, but he’d been running the church for
nearly half a decade with his friend N. Eldon Tanner with Joseph
Fielding Smith as his puppet.

After Lee died in 1973, Spencer Kimball took the mantle and made some
important reforms to keep the church in business for the next few
decades. It could be argued that in some ways the church today is still
resting on the laurels of Kimball. Marion Romney and Gordon Hinckley
would serve as first and second counselors to Kimball after N. Eldon
Tanner’s death.

Then came Ezra Benson. Benson became prophet after Hugh B. Brown’s
death, but while Brown was still an apostle, Ezra Benson and him were
enemies just as much as he and Harold Lee were enemies, Hugh Brown had
very few allies in the Q15. There were general conference talks in the
mid-70s where Brown would take the stand and give an emotive speech and
Ezra Benson would take the pulpit directly after him and call him Judas.
It was Lee and Benson campaigning together with the older generation of
apostles who got Hugh B. Brown kicked out of the first presidency.
Benson ran the church with Gordon Hinckley and Thomas Monson as his
counselors from 1985 to 1994, after which Howard Hunter took the office
for a brief stint. The only casualty to the first presidency during this
period was Marion Romney. Romney was first counselor to Spencer Kimball,
but when Benson took over, Romney was in such ill-health that he was
removed.

Marion Romney represents the last time that a member of the first
presidency from a previous prophet was not retained by the successor, 37
years ago. There were only 2 times before that in the 20<sup>th</sup>
century where a first or second counselor of the first presidency was
essentially fired by the incoming prophet. The first was Rudger Clawson
with Lorenzo Snow, and Clawson was fired for ecclesiastical matters, and
the third was Marion Romney who was fired for purely medical reasons.
Hugh B. Brown is the only guy who stands out in the last 100 years as
being removed from the office of first presidency for being
ideologically opposed to the prophet, and it happened nearly 50 years
ago in 1970 because Brown was too friendly to black people.

Put a pin in Hugh B. Brown, we’ll come back to him.

Let’s take a slightly shorter leap into the past with talking about the
prophet of my childhood, Gordon Hinckley. Hinckley took the office of
President from Howard Hunter. Hinckley had served with Thomas Monson as
councilors to Hunter and Ezra Benson. After Hunter’s death, Hinckley was
first in line having been ordained an apostle back in October of 1961,
Monson was called to apostleship just 2 years later. When Hinckley took
over, he named Thomas Monson and James E. Faust as his councilors. David
Bednar and Dieter Uchtdorf were called to office of FNG apostleship in
October 2004 after the deaths of David Haight and Neal Maxwell. James E.
Faust, then second councilor to Gordon Hinckley, died in 2007 and Henry
Eyring was called to fill his position as second Councilor. Fast forward
to one year later in February of 2008, Gordon Hinckley passed away and
the office of Prophet and President of LDS corp passed to his first
councilor, Thomas S. Monson. It wasn’t passed to Monson because he was
first councilor in the presidency, but, in keeping with the rules,
Monson had been an apostle since 1963 and had rightful claim to
seniority. Monson retained Henry Eyring as councilor, promoting him from
second to first, and took a gamble on the newest inductee to be his
second councilor, Dieter Uchtdorf.

Uchtdorf didn’t grow up in America. He was born in modern-day Czech
Republic to German parents. His father was a member of the Nazi army
when Dieter was a but a wee little lad. Dieter was 5 when the Third
Reich fell. His family fled to West Germany in the early 50s when it
became too dangerous to live in the Soviet Union. He went into the Air
Force soon after that and he’s been a pilot ever since. Uchtdorf doesn’t
have the same culture and upbringing as his largely Utah-grown
counterparts. Uchtdorf is seen as one of the few apostles who can appeal
to the younger generation, even though he’s in his 70s like most the
other Sr. apostles. He’s the guy who held up his iPhone when trying to
explain how Joseph’s seer stone worked. He’s the same guy who said he
drinks a diet soda that shall remain nameless. His stories about being a
pilot, featured in almost every talk he’s given, are relatable and fun.
Uchtdorf is one of the few who is slightly relatable to Mormons under
the age of 60 and his international heritage has been viewed as
progressive for the church. More importantly, Uchtdorf validated the
concerns of those who’ve left the church in his 2013 General Conference
talk. This was important to a lot of Mormon and, more particularly,
exmormons who’ve been burned by church history.

Uchtdorf and Bednar were Hinckley appointees that will stick around for
decades to come. Uchtdorf was born in 1940, Bednar, in 1952. These two
Hinckley era apostles are going to have seniority sooner than we think
because their next elder in line was appointed in 94 by Hunter, and
that’s Jeffrey Holland. Holland is currently 12 years older than
Bednar, and Bednar is currently the 3<sup>rd</sup> to youngest, with
Gary Stevenson being a mere 3 years younger. I predict Bednar will be
the 21<sup>st</sup> president, barring anything out of the ordinary,
which will probably happen within the next 10-15 years, give or take a
few with differing life expectancies.

Now, what happened in January of 2018? Russell Nelson was just ordained
to the office of Prophet and President. He did something which hasn’t
happened in recent Mormon history, he demoted Dieter Uchtdorf from
second councilor to a regular member of the Q12 just like we discussed
happened with Rudger Clawson, Marion Romney, and Hugh B. Brown. Contrary
to what you may be reading online, the last time a member of the
presidency was demoted back down to regular apostle was Marion Romney
with the transition from Spencer Kimball to Howard Hunter. However,
Marion Romney’s health was quickly declining near the end of Spencer
Kimball’s reign in 1985. So, when Ezra Benson took over the office after
Kimball’s death, he wasn’t going to elect an already dying man to be his
counselor, so he opted to go with Gordon B. Hinckley and Thomas Monson,
second and third in line to the office of prophet and spare Romney the
brief time in the presidency.

This was the last time that a member of the presidency wasn’t retained
when the office of President shifted, 32 years ago in 1985. But, Romney
was removed for medical reasons. He was scarcely seen after Benson took
office and died 3 years later in 1988. As of January 2018, Russell
Nelson took the office and named Dallin Oaks and Henry Eyring as his
counselors, Dieter Uchtdorf got the shaft and was removed from the first
presidency.

Let’s go ahead and pull the pin back out of Hugh B. Brown from David
McKay and Harold Lee era. Hugh Brown was a healthy guy who was removed
from office in 1970 solely because he was too progressive and appealed
to the younger generation and the Sr. apostles were ideologically
opposed to him. It looks like the same thing happened with Uchtdorf 48
years later. If you watch the press conferences you’ll see small
micromovements by Uchtdorf that paint a picture of a very disappointed
man who was just demoted after a fight with his boss.

Who did Russell Nelson put in Uchtdorf’s place? Dallin H. (homosexual
feelings are a controllable mental illness) Oaks. You can find a 2006
interview Oaks and Wickman had with a church public affairs committee
member. In this talk you’ll find such horrible gems from Oaks as this:

We’re not talking about a unique challenge here. We’re talking about a
common condition of mortality. We don’t understand exactly the ‘why,’ or
the extent to which there are inclinations or susceptibilities and so
on. But what we do know is that feelings can be controlled and behavior
can be controlled. The line of sin is between the feelings and the
behavior.

No, we do not accept the fact that conditions that prevent people from
attaining their eternal destiny were born into them without any ability
to control. That is contrary to the Plan of Salvation, and it is
contrary to the justice and mercy of God…That includes resisting
temptation. That includes dealing with things that we’re born with,
including disfigurements, or mental or physical incapacities. None of
these stand in the way of our attaining our eternal destiny. The same
may be said of a susceptibility or inclination to one behavior or
another which if yielded to would prevent us from achieving our eternal
destiny.

**PUBLIC AFFAIRS: You’re saying the Church doesn’t necessarily have a
position on ‘nurture or nature’**

ELDER OAKS: That’s where our doctrine comes into play. The Church does
not have a position on the causes of any of these susceptibilities or
inclinations, including those related to same-gender attraction. Those
are scientific questions — whether nature or nurture — those are things
the Church doesn’t have a position on.

Let’s not forget that for thousands of years the institution of marriage
has been between a man and a woman. Until quite recently, in a limited
number of countries, there has been no such thing as a marriage between
persons of the same gender. Suddenly we are faced with the claim that
thousands of years of human experience should be set aside because we
should not discriminate in relation to the institution of marriage. When
that claim is made, the burden of proving that this step will not undo
the wisdom and stability of millennia of experience lies on those who
would make the change. Yet the question is asked and the matter is put
forward as if those who believe in marriage between a man and a woman
have the burden of proving that it should not be extended to some other
set of conditions.

The rest of the interview is peppered with highly educated bigotry
thinly veiled by flower wording and specific buzz words common to 2006,
but as recently as the Oct 2017 conference Oaks spoke about the sanctity
of marriage being between one man and one woman.

Let’s look at the presidency as it will be for the next year or two.
President Nelson has his fair share of homophobic quotes and these were
only a few tiny extracts from Dallin Oaks’ long rap sheet of homophobia.
Henry Eyring seems to be the heartsell cry-voice placeholder just biding
his time until he passes away. Next in line to be prophet after Nelson
passes away is Oaks. Should Oaks survive Nelson, I’d put my money on
Ballard or Holland taking their place, unless the brethren want to usher
in the Bednar generation sooner and put him in as one of Oaks’
counselors. Given age expectancy, Jeffrey taffy-pulling dodo Holland
will become the next prophet after Oaks. At that point, Uchtdorf will be
next in line, but also in his mid to late 80s, while David there are no
homosexual members of the church Bednar, next in line after Uchtdorf,
will still be in his 70s, ready to lead the church for the next 20 years
in further and further homophobic directions.

One aspect lost in all this is the presidency’s ability to appoint new
apostles during their time. Each time an apostle dies, the presidency
nominates the new appointee and the entire Q15 vote. If Nelson Oaks and
Eyring tap into somebody like W. Christopher Waddell, he’s 58 right now,
almost 2 decades younger than the average age of the apostles. On the
other hand, they may tap L. Whitney Clayton from the presidency of the
Seventy, who’s older than Bednar right now, and that guy will likely
never become president. These apostolic appointments represent a 20-30
year game plan for the people who elect them. Then again, they may make
a largely ceremonial appointment who has very little chance of becoming
the president one day; someone who can appeal to a different
demographic, but is still a trusted guy. How about Claudio R. M. Costa
from Sao Paulo Brazil who’s been in the seventy for over 2 decades and
is almost in his seventies. No danger of him being prophet, but that
last name and his heritage will definitely appeal to Southern and
Central American Mormons where the church could use an invigoration to
their chapels attendance.

Predictions for apostles out of the way, the main takeaway I’ve pulled
from looking into this since the announcements were made is that this
current generation of church leadership has a sordid history with
bigotry, specifically homophobia and the shit is not looking up anytime
in the near future. Keep in mind, all the current Sr. apostles were born
before WWII and grew up in a church that didn’t allow black people into
their heaven. They don’t allow practicing gay people into their heaven
right now. The next generation of the LDS church is only going to foster
an even more nightmarish environment for LGBTQ people, especially those
who are or will be teenagers in the coming decade. Life for gay people
in the church is only going to get harder with the current leadership
and the only possible ally the younger generation had was just demoted
from the presidency because he was too progressive. Removing Uchtdorf is
our dead canary. The church won’t be moving anytime soon when it comes
to LGBTQ treatment. January 2018 shows us that the church isn’t
interested in changing. This month is a dark time. Just like with Hugh
B. Brown being demoted because he wanted to become more tolerant to
black members, Uchtdorf was prominently demoted, likely for similar
reasons when it comes to the church’s treatment of LGBTQ members.

After Hugh B. Brown was moved down to regular apostle from the
presidency, it still took them almost another decade before they
embraced civil rights, which only happened after Brown’s death. I hope
the church isn’t another decade or the death of Uchtdorf away from
softening their stance, but if history is an indicator of future events,
when we look at the history of Hugh B. Brown compared to Dieter
Uchtdorf, then I’m not very optimistic. Literally thousands of gay kids
are going to kill themselves in the coming decade or two as the church
continues to wax divergent from progressivism and acceptance.

Hyrum Nickname

One piece of the Mormon puzzle which we’ve yet to really examine and
bring in properly to our timeline is Hyrum Smith. Comparatively speaking
Hyrum is a bit of an enigma when it comes to Mormon history. He’s always
overshadowed by his younger brother. Only one comprehensive biography
has ever been written about Hyrum and the Hyrum Smith papers is a
project the church is currently working on to shed a bit more light on
his contribution to Mormon history.

He was Jo’s closest confidant. Once Alvin passed away in 1823, Hyrum
took over as the eldest brother and emotional support for his younger
siblings. If you watch the Mormon movies depicting Hyrum, you’ll see him
throw Jo over his back and run through a field when the young child Jo
was limping on crutches from his recent leg surgery.

He’s been present on the outskirts of our historical timeline since day
one, but we’ve yet to focus on him at any level beyond just mentioning
when Jo would send him on a mission or something to that effect.

We need to give Hyrum a proper NaMo Nickname for our timeline. Let’s get
a little background to get the creative juices flowing. Hyrum was born
in 1800 to the Smith family in Vermont, a mere 5 years older than his
next youngest brother, Joseph. Possibly as an homage to Joseph Sr.’s
dabbling in Masonry with his fellow fraternity of rodsmen, the initial
spelling of Hyrum Smith was actually Hiram, the masonic spelling of the
central character of the 3<sup>rd</sup> degree masonic ascendency ritual
involving the allegory of Hiram Abiff.

Little is known of Hiram’s early history. He assisted Jo in the printing
process of the BoM, running copies of the manuscript to and from the
Grandin printing office for the last 6 months of 1829. From the
foundation of the church, Hyrum was inextricably tied to Joseph. He’d
become a member of the Canandaigua Masonic lodge in 1826 about the same
time he and some of the other Smiths joined up with the Methodist church
in Manchester. It was about this same time that Hiram began spelling his
name Hyrum instead and most of his writings record it as such.

He was always a support for Jo. When Jo had something that needed to be
done, Hyrum was there to pick up the slack. When Jo would go out
partying, Hyrum was right there with him racing and flipping over horse
carriages in a drunken stupor.

When collecting funds for the church, Hyrum was usually on the forefront
of the effort, personally knocking on doors and asking members for money
to build this temple or help to buy that printing press. Hyrum was there
for Zion’s camp, for the Kirtland Safety Society. Hyrum attended most of
the prayer meetings Jo held where a dozen or so guys would see angels
after partaking of the lord’s sacrament. Every step of the way, Hyrum
has been next to Jo, but this whole time we’ve only ever mentioned him
as a backdrop character.

Let’s bring Hyrum out of the Jo’s shadow and into the harsh white-hot
light of historical scrutiny by giving him his very own NaMo nickname.

Hyrum was the initial person to steal the chocolate-colored seer stone
from Willard Chase, which they all found while they were digging a well
on the Chase farm. Digging a well, treasure-digging, sometimes the only
distinction between the two was whether they struck water or buried
treasure first. Hiram “borrowed” the stone from Willard and when Willard
went back to the Smith farm at a later time and accused Hyrum and Jo of
stealing the precious seer stone, Hyrum viciously defended his brother’s
and his own actions by calling Willard a liar for insinuating they would
stoop so low as to steal a seer stone. That same stone was likely the
stone Jo used to translate the BoM. If not for Hiram stealing it, the
BoM might never have come to be. Paying homage to his namesake with some
insider Masonry, why not Hycacia?

Hyrum was one of the main proponents and overseers of the Kirtland
Temple. He was one of the first to break ground in digging the
foundation, he oversaw collecting funds, he performed days’ worth of
carpentry and masonry work during the construction process. You can even
see the initials H. S. carved with a knife into the wood of the belfry
tower of the Kirtland Temple and the people who take care of it think
that H.S. is, indeed, our boy Hyrum Smith. Even if insignificant or
unperceived, Hyrum always left his mark. For anyone who’s read Quinn’s
Magic World View, Agla makes a pretty good name for Hyrum.

Hyrum was also on a mission to the Eastern states in 1837, likely
collecting funds to bail the church out of debt from the KSS and temple
project when his wife, Jerusha Barden, gave birth to his child and died
from injuries sustained during childbirth in October 1837. Jo was quick
to matchmake Hyrum out of his Widower depression by offering him Mary
Fielding, to whom Hyrum was married a mere 2 months after the death of
Jerusha Barden. Less than a year after that they had Joseph F. Smith,
who would later become prophet of the Brighamite sect, born in Missouri
in 1838. With as quick on the rebound as he was, maybe we should go with
a much less esoteric of a name, Racquetball Hyrum?

Then there’s the little love triangle between Hyrum, Jo, and Emma. It
was reported that when Jo and Hyrum’s bodies were returned to Nauvoo
after Carthage that Emma ran to Hyrum’s casket first while Eliza Snow
ran to Jo’s casket first, both women inconsolably sobbing at the loss of
their true loves. His 3 other wives seemed just broken up about his
death but would go on to marry other Mormon elites like Heber Kimball.
Whether it was a rod cut from a witch hazel plant, an iron rod for
constructing the temple, a hollowed-out wooden rod used to smoke tobacco
and other narcotics, or the rod of nature Hyrum himself grew, he knew
how to handle rods. Hyrum, the man of many rods. Hyrod, if you will.

Hyrum is a hard name to play with, but you guys are more creative than
me. You know how to play along, you can vote on your favorite Hyrum
Smith nickname of Hyrod, Racquetball, Agla, or Hycacia, or come up with
a much better one by posting on Twitter with \#NaMoNickname or on
facebook and I’ll arbitrarily pick the winner from this terrible list or
any that are proposed and plug whoever it is that’s our winner.

Big shoutout to Jonathan Tindell, not only for providing his voice for
the intro for the past few weeks, but also for endearing our Mormon
Titan with a perfectly fitting name of Talos. Be sure to give him a
follow @secular\_stories or Jonathan Tindell or Secular Stories on FB.

Some may view our Mormon dreadnought as a ham-fisted story-telling
mechanism, or \*gasp\* an anachronistic construct superfluously added to
an already complex history. While valid criticisms based on opinion,
with what we have in store, you’ll have to trust me that the utility of
Talos will outweigh the sheer stupidity of its existence.

BONUS:

124:103 And again, verily 🍺 I say unto you, if my servant Sidney will
serve me and be counselor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and come
up and stand in the office of his calling, and humble himself before me.

104 And if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering, and
acknowledgments, and remain with my people, behold 🍺, I, the Lord your
God, will heal him that he shall be healed; and he shall lift up his
voice again on the mountains, and be a spokesman before my face.

105 Let him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my
servant Joseph resides.
