---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 88 - Joseph Smith Arrested… Again
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-88-joseph-smith-arrested/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-88-joseph-smith-arrested-again
category: History
date: 2018-02-02 03:25:45 +0000
---

2/1/18

Ep 88 – Joseph Smith Arrested… Again

On this episode, we pick up with giving Wilford Woodruff his very own
NaMo nickname. After that we jump into the historical timeline following
the Q12 on their journey from Liverpool to New York and the great
tempests and near death they faced. Then we zoom back in to Nauvoo to
see what Jo and friends were up to while the Quorum was on their way
back. ThomAss Sharp fires some shots across the bow of the Mormons’
Times and Season, and the Mormons fire back. After that we’re joined by
a children’s book author who offers some insight to his method of
teaching children a love for science and skepticism.

Links:

Manuscript History of Brigham Young  
<https://www.boap.org/LDS/Early-Saints/MSHBY.html>

Willard Richards  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/willard-richards>  
<http://famous-trials.com/carthrage/1254-chronology>  
<http://www.116pages.com/2017/11/willard-richards-prophecy.html>

Times and Season 1841  
<http://www.centerplace.org/history/ts/v2n14.htm>  
<http://contentdm.lib.byu.edu/cdm/ref/collection/NCMP1820-1846/id/9099>

Warsaw Signal  
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1841.htm>

Annabelle & Aiden Children’s science books  
<https://www.annabelleandaiden.com/>  
<http://christiannews.net/2016/09/05/increasingly-aggressive-atheists-target-children-in-new-evolution-promoting-book/>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

What value can we set on the ineffable feeling of permanence? The idea
of humans having 5 senses has been resoundingly debunked ages ago in
lieu of modern psychology putting the number above twenty senses. Sight,
hearing, smell, taste, and touch are the big five, but there are more
than a dozen other senses our human body picks up and feeds into our
brain. Proprioception, where we are in space; sense of pressure related
to touch; sense of tension in our own muscles; nociception, our sense of
pain; chemoreceptors; how our brain knows about chemical and hormonal
changes in our bloodstream; hunger; thirst; time; all of these are sense
that don’t fall into the big 5 senses. What about our sense of
well-being? Where we fall on the gradient from safe well-being to
complete anxiety is a much harder sense to quantify. One of the
subjective senses wrapped up in our sense of well-being is a sense of
permanence. Humans can’t achieve homeostasis without feeling like they
have something or somewhere they call home. Even nomadic tribes who
follow the hunt have temporary places they call home to fulfill the
overwhelming sense of needing permanence. So I ask again, what value can
we set on the feeling of permanence?

April 20<sup>th</sup>, 1841, most of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles
were currently anchored just outside Liverpool awaiting their passage to
the America. They left behind Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde to run the
Millennial Star periodical and continue his mission to the holy land
respectively. On board the ship, Rochester, Bloody Brigham Young and
Heber Creeper Kimball were the directing agents of over 100 converts who
were just beginning their emigration to join the Saints in Nauvoo.

This was not the first group of European immigrants to make their way to
America because of Mormonism, but this small group was tantamount to
Bloody Brigham presenting Jo with a few pelts to prove he’d done what he
set out to do. It would be another 2.5 months before Brigham and the
rest of the quorum made their way back to Nauvoo where they received a
much-deserved glowing reception from the prophet.

Before discussing the transoceanic voyage of the twelve and the
accompanying 130 immigrants, we have some business to take care of,
Wilford Woodruff. Woodruff would eventually become the prophet who
outlawed polygamy in the Utah years and he’s been a member of our
timeline for quite sometime without becoming terrible distinguished. As
the Nauvoo years progress, Woodruff will become increasingly more
important to us and is deserving of his very own NaMo Nickname. As per
the rules of our Nickname game, I propose a few terrible possible names,
you guys vote on twitter or facebook at Naked Mormonism, and I
arbitrarily pick a winner from the entries. Last week’s winner came in
on twitter under the name TakinHayekSeriously @FriedrichHayek who
proposed Willy Goat Woodruff followed up by “Look at the beard”. I
couldn’t help but chuckle so that’s definitely our winner for Wilford
Woodruff’s NaMo nickname, Willy Goat Woodruff. Be sure to give
@FriedrichHayek a follow.

This week’s proposal comes for another increasingly prominent figure in
Mormon history, and you’ll soon see why we’re working with this guy when
we get into the history. Willard Richards was born Hopkinton
Massachusetts on 24 June 1804. He suffered a childhood brain trauma and
would endure tremors and partial paralysis for the rest of his life from
the injury. He would come to use his cane in his later years prior to
his death in 1854 out of necessity. Willard Richards became educated at
a young age and began teaching school at the age of 16. At the age of
thirty, his sister, Susan’s, death motivated him to go to medical school
and become a physician. He became a Thompsonian botanical physician and
later practiced as a general physician and midwife, but always stayed
true to the curative powers of plants and herbs. How about Green-Thumb
Willard for a NaMo nickname?

In 1836, Willard Richards was visited by his cousins Bloody Brigham and
Joseph Young when they gave him a Book of Mormon. Richards reportedly
read it twice in ten days and immediately packed up his things and moved
to Kirtland. How about Richy the Book Worm?

He was baptized an ordained an elder rather quickly upon his arrival to
Kirtland. He became a member of the travelling quorum of apostles in
1840 while on a mission trip to England. He had made it to England a
couple years prior than the rest of the quorum where he met his wife,
Janetta, and they had their first child. Willard Richards may actually
mark the first Mormon missionary who met his wife on his mission, which
actually tends to happen a lot. How about Investigateher Richards? See
what I did there?

Alright there’s one more high point with Richards we’ll discuss before
jumping into the history for today. Richards was the primary editor of
the History of the Church published in the Deseret News throughout 1852.
He worked in close concert with Brigham Young and Heber Kimball to scrub
absolutely everything damning out of the history of the church and
cobbling thousands of documents together to rewrite them in Joseph
Smith’s first-person perspective. No other historical revisionist in
all Mormon history had such a dramatic impact on how the public views
the history of Mormonism than Willard Richards. Mormons today view the
abstract picture of Mormon history painted by the painstaking hands of
Willard Richards, how about Richard Van Gogh?

Yes those are terrible, but maybe something will come up today for us to
get a proper NaMo nickname for Willard Richards. What do you think we
should know him as? Green-Thumb Willard, Richy the Book Worm,
Investigateher Richards or Richard Van Gogh? Or, maybe you have a much
better name bouncing around your head for him, I’d love to hear it and
for you to be next week’s NaMo nickname winner. Vote or propose your
favorite nickname. Tweet @nakedmormonism with \#NaMonickname or post on
the facebook page or you can send in an email to
<nakedmormonism@gmail.com> and I’ll arbitrarily select my favorite just
like with Willy Goat Wilford from @FriedrichHayek.

Let’s get into the historical timeline by picking up with the Quorum of
the Twelve apostles. The voyage from Liverpool to New York was anything
but smooth. The ship, Rochester, finally set sail on April
21<sup>st</sup>, 1841. Picking up from where we last left off in Bloody
Brigham’s manuscript history, linked in the show notes:

“--21-- The wind is favorable; busily engaged nailing down and lashing
our luggage to prepare for sea. The anchor weighed and sails spread at
12 m. We had a good breeze through the day, but nearly all the
passengers were seasick and vomited at a dreadful rate. The Twelve and
the Saints occupied the second cabin, other passengers occupied the
steerage…

\--22-- Many arose quite weak through vomiting and sickness. Pleasant
morning; nearly out of sight of land; ten sail in sight. Elders Kimball
and Woodruff assisted me in getting the sick passengers out of their
berths to take the air. Elder Geo. \[George\] A. Smith was quite sick
with a severe cough.

…

\--25-- Sea mountains high; head wind; ship rocking and pitching; nearly
all seasick.

\--26-- We partook of a little food this morning, but were weak and
feeble. We still have head winds and rough sea, though the sun shines.
We met and prayed for the sick and they began to amend.

\--27-- Still high wind; the sick somewhat better; the Twelve are
generally well.

April 28.-- Strong head winds, which increased to a tempest. The sails
were close reefed, the tempest raging furiously, sea running mountains
high. We shipped heavy seas, and, while in the midst of this scenery,
the cry of help was heard in our cabin; we rushed to the scene and found
the ropes giving way and breaking which held about 40 tons of luggage,
piled up between decks, consisting of heavy trunks, chests and barrels,
which, if once liberated from their confinement, would with one surge be
hurled with great force into the berths of men, women and children and
would have endangered the lives of all.

On seeing the foundation of this mass giving way, Elders Richards,
Woodruff, Pratt and others sprang to the place of danger and braced
themselves against the baggage and held it for a few moments until we
partially secured it, when the captain sent several sailors with ropes,
who made the same fast and secure. When this was done, I repaired to the
aft quarter deck with Brothers Kimball, Richards, Woodruff and Smith and
gazed upon the grandeur of the raging tempest and the movements of the
ship for a short time. We all went below, except Elders Woodruff and
Richards, who remained until a heavy sea broke over the quarter deck,
which thoroughly drenched Brother Woodruff; Brother Richards was
partially saved by throwing himself under the bulwarks; they then
thought it best to leave, and followed our example by coming below. We
did not sleep much during the night, for boxes, barrels and tins were
tumbling from one end of the cabin to the other, and in the steerage 15
berths were thrown down, nine at one surge, all the men, women and
children thrown together in a pile; but no lives were lost nor bones
broken.

\--29-- The gale has ceased; sea rough; sun shines pleasantly; a fair
wind for the first time since the day of sailing. We are sailing ten
knots an hour; nearly all had a good night's rest; I was very sick and
distressed in my head and stomach.

\--30-- Fine breeze; sailing ten knots an hour; fears entertained that
the ship was on fire, as smoke arose, but it was found to come from the
cook's galley. Brother Woodruff, in the morning, was requested to carry
the dishes to the cook for washing; he got his hands full of dishes of
various kinds, and, as he stepped to the door of the galley, the ship
gave a dreadful lurch and rocked until her studding sails reached the
water; this unexpected heave plunged Brother Woodruff head foremost
about ten feet, the whole width of the galley. The cook, in trying to
save him, fell on the top of him. As this was his first introduction to
the galley since he had been at sea, he begged the cook's pardon for
such an abrupt entrance and withdrew, leaving the cook with three
smashed fingers to pick up his dishes at leisure, they being scattered
from one end of the galley to the other. When the cook saw me, he
beseeched me very earnestly, whoever I sent to the galley, for mercy's
sake never send Mr. Woodruff again, as he came nigh getting killed by
him.

…

\--17-- Strong head winds; we came in view of Long Island, 3 p.m. took a
pilot on board at 4, who informed us that they had not heard from the
Oxford, nor any ship which left Liverpool at the time we did, nor for
several days before; he also informed us that no word had been heard of
the steamship President; all expected she was lost.

\--18-- Strong northwest wind; sailing nine knots an hour. We heard of
the death of General Harrison, President of the United States.

\--19-- While passing through Sandy Hook we ran into a fishing smack,
came near sinking her with all on board. We had a head wind and could
not run into the dock; cast anchor at 11 a.m. at the quarantine ground.
A steamer came down to get the latest Liverpool news. An editor, who
came on board, paid the steamer $45 to bring him out to the ship to get
the latest news.

\--20-- Warm, pleasant weather. We commenced early in the morning to get
our luggage on deck. There was a fight between the carpenter and second
mate, which was ended by the first mate striking the carpenter with a
junk bottle, and as he went to strike the second blow, I caught his arm
and prevented him.

Two quarantine lighters came alongside the Rochester and took all the
passengers and baggage to the Custom House, where we had to unload all
the baggage, which was inspected by the officers, after which we
reloaded on board the lighters, which took us to New York City.

When we arrived at the docks, we found them covered with horses and
drays and a great crowd of draymen and pickpockets, who stood ready to
leap on board and devour all our baggage, and, because we were unwilling
to be robbed and felt disposed to do our own business without being
forced to measures by draymen, they cursed and swore at a dreadful rate,
and acted more like savages than civilized men; but, after much
difficulty, we got our goods out of the lighters and loaded on drays,
and had to keep constant guard over them to keep them from being stolen.
Many attempts were made to steal our baggage. I collared some of the
thieves, and threatened to throw them overboard if they would not let it
alone, I was under the necessity of striking their fingers to keep them
from carrying off the trunks they laid hold of.

We were until ten o'clock at night getting from the docks to an inn. We
were all very much fatigued, for we had been constantly handling boxes,
chests, barrels and trunks from sunrise till ten p.m. without eating or
drinking. We took supper about midnight and laid down to rest at the
Battery Pavilion.

\--21-- Brother Kimball, O. \[Orson\] Pratt and myself took lodgings at
the house of Elder Adams.”

Finally on May 21, 1841 the majority of the Q12 had landed back
stateside and were continuing their journey towards the promised land of
Nauvoo.

The rest of April 1841 was busy as ever for the church and its
leadership back at HQ in Nauvoo. They had received letters from the
Quorum telling of their speedy return which came in the midst of a
bustling town of vigorous construction and excitement.

But let’s walk it back for just a second; 1840 was a weird year for the
Mormons. They’d just spent a year building themselves up in Missouri
over 1838, but were kicked out after having spent less than one calendar
year fabricating a lifestyle for themselves. 1839 was a year ravaged by
sickness and starvation with the Saints building makeshift lean-tos or
living out of their wagons as they frequently moved around all the land
being purchased by Jo and the church, searching for a permanent
homestead. 1840, however, was the year when the Mormons were uncertain
of whether or not the state of Illinois would treat them as the state of
Missouri had.

Could they finally settle and put down roots in Illinois and Iowa along
the Mississippi, or were the damned mobocrats going to chase them
further west? If they were going to be chased out again, was it even
worth it to go to all the work of rebuilding and planting crops if they
won’t be staying there? These unanswerable questions plagued the Mormons
and made settling a high-risk gamble for any Mormon who was simply
following the prophet. 1841, however, was different.

1841 was the first year the Mormons had any sense of permanence since
being driven from Kirtland over 3 years prior. With the passing of the
Nauvoo charter, annexing of multiple territories made safe to settle for
the saints, conversion of Illinois state officials, and the blessing of
dozens of politicians, it finally seemed like the Mormons would have a
safe place to call home. Spring of 1841 marks an incredible shift in the
actions of the Mormons as they would really begin settling and building
in earnest when they’d been apprehensive and gunshy prior to 1841.

With the renewed zeal and confidence exhibited by the leadership during
the April 1841 general conference, the rest of the Saints were signaled
that it was finally safe to call Nauvoo home. The Mormons’ collective
sense of well-being with this newfound feeling of permanence caused a
powerful upheaval and renewed vigor for proposed projects handed down
from on high.

When you live in the hometown of Microsoft, Google, Amazon, and hundreds
of other tech startup companies, your friends tend to be software
developers. A common theme in so many conversations about my friends’
projects is that the public face of any tech or internet company is
completely different than what’s really going on behind the scenes.
Regardless of how shiny, beautiful, or convenient your favorite app or
website is, it’s incredibly likely that all the code behind the user
interface is inches away from being constantly on fire. That’s how the
Mormons operated. On the public face, everything looked good, but behind
closed doors in the actual meetings of the elites, nothing was okay and
chaos was the only ruling principle. But, this trouble was only
perceived by those who were dealing with it constantly, the wider public
was completely unaware and even the majority of the Mormons were just
following the prophet with absolutely no idea how close to anarchy
Nauvoo really was.

While the average Mormon shared this 1841 reinvigoration with their
fellow brothers in the covenant, the leadership, who knew what
everything underneath the beautified streets of Nauvoo actually looked
like, was trying their level best to insulate the average Mormon while
keeping things at a smooth rolling boil without exploding and being
consumed. But, the leadership was effective at hiding the chaos. They’d
been able to create a city for the Mormons, and more importantly, the
leadership had been able to foster that invaluable sense of permanence
and well-being the Mormons had so desperately been lacking for the past
3 years.

As this illusion of security and permanence slowly infected the saints,
Jo and the elite leveraged the illusion to accomplish the necessary
tasks in building up Nauvoo. First on the docket for the remainder of
April 1841 was to properly organize the Nauvoo Legion. The Legion was
present during the April 6<sup>th</sup> temple dedication ceremony, but
that was just a bunch of dudes standing in uniformed battle lines
holding guns, now Jo and John Wreck-it Bennett had to properly organize
the Legion with legitimate military ranks.

From the Dan Vogel HoC 4:350

“The first regiment, first cohort of the Nauvoo Legion was organized,
and Captain George Miller was elected colonel; Captain Stephen Markham,
lieutenant-colonel, and Captain William Wightman, major of the same,
consisting of four companies.

Also the second regiment, second cohort was organized, and Captain
Francis M. Higbee was elected colonel; Captain Nelson Higgins,
lieutenant-colonel, and Aaron H. Golden, major, consisting of four
companies.”

And just like that the Nauvoo Legion was organized into legitimate
companies with captains, and colonels consisting purely of trusted
Mormon elites. Now this rag-tag group of disorganized guys with guns
could finally run drills and march in command lines with Jo and Wreck-it
Bennett wielding jewel-laden swords of curious workmanship at the head
of the army. They decided to run drills on July 3<sup>rd</sup> 1841 with
this letter dated May 4, 1841.

“General Orders.—Pursuant to an act of the Court Martial, the troops
attached or belonging to the Legion will parade at the place of general
rendezvous, in the city of Nauvoo, for drill, review, and inspection, on
Saturday, the 3<sup>rd</sup> day of July, at half-past nine o’clock,
a.m., armed and equipped according to law. At 10 o’clock the line will
be formed, and the general companies, 2<sup>nd</sup> battalion,
1<sup>st</sup> regiment, 2<sup>nd</sup> cohort, are directed to enroll
every man residing within the bounds of their respective commands, and
not attached to any other company of the Legion, between the ages of 18
and 45 years, and notify them of their attachment to the service, and
their legal liabilities.”

This notice was circulated in the Times and Seasons in the mid-May
edition for all Mormons to see. But, gentiles could see it as well.
This, along with previous sentiments, made service in the Nauvoo Legion
compulsory for Mormon men between 18 and 45, and it was the
responsibility of the various Colonels to make sure every able-bodied
man within that age range was fulfilling their duties.

Let’s be clear, one solid criticism of the Nauvoo Legion was that it was
made up solely of Nauvoo residents which, in 1841, were almost
exclusively Mormons. It was also commanded by the Mormon Elite with Jo
doubling as prophet of the religion and commander-in-chief of the
Legion. This criticism was noticed by many and a public declaration was
required to allay concerns that the Mormons had formed a
state-sanctioned religious mafia.

Vogel HoC 4:352

“The Legion is not, as has been falsely represented by its enemies,
exclusively a Mormon Military Association, but a body of citizen
soldiers organized (without regard to political preferences or religious
sentiments) for the public defense, the general good, and the
preservation of law and order,--to save the innocent, unoffending
citizens from the iron grasp of the oppressor, and perpetuate and
sustain our free institutions against misrule, anarchy, and mob
violence—no other views are entertained or tolerated. The general
parades of the Legion will be in the city of Nauvoo, but all other
musters will be within the bounds of the respective companies,
battalions, regiments, and cohorts.”

This may have been Nauvoo Legion policy, but it didn’t play out in
practice. The Nauvoo Legion was comprised entirely of Mormon men at this
time and would remain so nearly without exception for the rest of its
existence in Illinois.

Another fascinating addendum to these new movements with the Nauvoo
Legion was a promotion of General John C. Wreck-it Bennett to Nauvoo’s
Master in Chancery. I had to look this up because it was a government
position completely unfamiliar to me. Turns out it was abolished in 1897
in lieu of the title Master of the Supreme Court of a given
jurisdiction.

Here’s the definition of Master in Chancery from uslegal.com:

“Master in chancery is an officer appointed by a court of equity to
assist the court. Generally, master in chancery is a senior official or
clerk of a court of chancery who assists the Chancellor in various
duties such as inquiring into matters referred by the court, examining
cases, taking oaths and affidavits, hearing testimony, and computing
damages. The office of master in chancery was abolished in 1897 and was
replaced by the office of Master of the Supreme Court.”

Rack up one more hat in Wreck-it Bennett’s professional closet. Not only
was Bennett Jo’s 2<sup>nd</sup> closest advisor at this time behind
Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith, but he was still Quartermaster General of
Illinois, Mayor of Nauvoo, general of the Nauvoo Legion, and now, in May
1841, he directs what cases the courts of Nauvoo will hear, and, more
importantly, what cases they’ll refuse to grant certiorari.

There was no separation of church and state in Nauvoo. The church was
the government and the same people who ran the church ran Nauvoo, they
were one-in-the-same. Bennett’s appointment to this office was overseen
by Judge Stephen A. Douglas, friendly to the Mormons but not a Mormon.
This is the same Stephen Douglas who ran against Abraham Lincoln for the
presidency. His friendly stance towards the Mormons was political
capital at this time, but would serve to be his primary political
liability at a later time.

People in surrounding areas noticed Douglas’ appointment of Wreck-it
Bennett, a man with a sordid personal history. Most notably, ThomAss
Coke Sharp, writer and editor of the Warsaw Signal a day’s journey south
of Nauvoo wrote about the appointment and recent political movements of
the Mormon church. In the May 19, 1841 publication of the Warsaw Signal
we find this gem:

“APPOINTMENT.

We have no disposition to complain of the official acts of Judge
Douglass, for whom, as a man and an officer, we maintain the highest
regard, but there is one act of his which receives our unqualified
disapprobation; and we speak advisedly when we say that it is frowned on
with indignity by nine-tenths of the substantial citizens of the county
-- we speak of the appointment of Gen. BENNETT to be Master in Chancery.
Whether from political motives or personal regard, it is certainly an
act that has astonished the members of both parties, by its
indiscretion. Bennett has but recently become an inhabitant of this
state. He came here followed by evil report-he joins a sect and
advocates a creed in which no one believes he has any faith -- his true
character is not known to our citizens, nor have they any confidence in
him -- under such circumstances we believe, and we are not alone in this
belief, that Judge Douglass has committed an error in countenancing and
encouraging such a man by the gift of a responsible office -- an office
involving the rights, and in certain instances the liberties of freemen.
We, for one, say, let the citizens of this county remonstrate against
the appointment.”

From later in the same publication under the heading of “MORMONS”

“While on the subject, however, we will notice an accusation which has
been made against us -- that of having, for political effect, flattered
the Mormons. This is not true. -- We have occasionally noticed their
doings, but not with any such design. We believe they have the same
rights as other religious bodies possess, and ought to be protected in
the just and proper exercise of those rights. We do not believe in
persecution for opinion's sake. But whenever they as a people, step
beyond the proper sphere of a religious denomination, and become a
political body, as many of our citizens are beginning to apprehend will
be the case -- then this press stands pledged to take a stand against
them. On religious questions it is and shall remain neutral -- but it is
bound to oppose the concentration of political power in a religious
body, or in the hands of a few individuals.   
  
We say, then, that while ever the inordinate power which the Prophet and
the leaders of the Church possess over their people, is confined within
its legitimate boundaries, we are content; but when it comes to be
exercised or attempted beyond this, we will be ready to take as decided
a stand as any one in opposing them.”

Jo was livid by ThomAss Sharp’s pointed remarks and published the
following in the next edition of the Times & Seasons in response to the
Warsaw Signal:

“We can hardly find language to express our surprise and disapprobation
at the conduct of the Editor of the “Signal” as manifested in that paper
of the 19<sup>th</sup> inst. We had fondly hoped that the sentiments
there expressed, would never have dared to be uttered by any individual,
in the community in which we reside, whose friendship we esteem, and
whose virtuous and honorable conduct, have secured them the approval of
every patriotic and benevolent mind. We are, however, anxious to know
the real feelings of individuals, and are glad that the latent feelings
of the Editor of the Signal, have at last, manifested themselves,
clearly and distinctly.  
And, we would ask the Editor of the Signal, what is the cause of his
hostility—of this sudden and unexpected ebullition of feeling—this
spirit of opposition and animosity? Whose rights have been trampled
upon? Whose peace have we disturbed? General Bennett has been appointed
Master in Chancery, by Judge Douglass, and General Bennett is a Mormon\!
This is the atrocious act—this is the cause of the Editor’s vile
vituperation. It will not require the gift of discernment to tell what
spirit the Editor was possessed of, when he wrote the following:--

Quotes from Warsaw Signal passage we previously read… Goes on to say:

It is obvious, that the intention is to make the community believe, that
General Bennett is a mere rengado—hypocrite—and all that is base in
humanity. But General Bennett’s character as a gentleman, an officer, a
scholar, and physician stands too high to need defending by us, suffice
it to say, that he is in the confidence of the Executive, holds the
office of Quarter Master General of this state, and is well known to a
large number of persons of the first respectability throughout the
state. He has, likewise, been favorably known for upwards of eight years
by some of the authorities of the church, and has resided three years in
this state. But being a Mormon, his virtues are construed into defects,
and is thought a proper object of the base, cowardly, and ungentlemanly
attack of the Editor of the “Signal.”…

The Editor, then, after stating that it is not his intention to
interfere in our religious concerns, says “But whenever they as a
people, step beyond the proper sphere of a religious denomination, and
become a political body as many citizens are beginning to apprehend will
be the case, then this press stands pledged to take a stand against
them.” Terrible annunciation\!—What\! The Editor of the “Signal,”
concentrate all his mighty energies against us\! Alarming\!\! O ye free
and independent citizens of Hancock County, whose misfortune it is to be
associated with the church of Latter Day Saints, be careful how you used
your elective franchise, do not concentrate on any one individual,
particularly if opposed to the “Signal,” for if you do, depend upon it,
that an engine, more terrible than that which the ancient Romans used to
bring down the walls of mighty cities, will be pointed at you, and play
upon you with terrible destruction. Hear and take warning for “this
press stands pledged to take a stand against them”\!\!...

The more we reflect on the subject, the more we are satisfied of the
baseness of the motives which have induced the Editor to make an attack
upon this community; a community that has never done him any harm, but
ever treated him with hospitality and kindness.  
His conduct must sink him in the estimation of all those who love the
prosperity of this county and state, and who are possessed of those high
toned feelings of republicanism, which animated the bosom of their
ancestors; and which are the pride of Americans.”

As Jo had been a subscriber to the Warsaw Signal prior to this
publication until ThomAss Sharp had published the article about Wreck-it
Bennett, he didn’t feel it any longer necessary to subscribe and sent
this to ThomAss Sharp in response to Sharp’s pointed criticisms. The
disgust is palpable:

“NAUVOO, Ill., May 26, 1841.   
*Mr. Sharp, Editor of the Warsaw Signal:*   
  
SIR: -- You will discontinue my paper; its contents are calculated to
pollute me. And to patronize that filthy sheet, that tissue of lies,
that sink of iniquity, is disgraceful to any moral man.     Yours with
utter contempt.  
                                  JOSEPH SMITH.   
  
P. S. -- Please publish the above in your contemptible paper.  
                  J.S.”

Sharp fired back by publishing the note and calling for Jo’s lapsed
subscription charges of $3.00:

“Now, as one good turn deserves another, we annex below, for the benefit
of the aforesaid Prophet, a revelation from our books, in this wise 

>                               Warsaw, ILL., June 2, 1841.  
> JOSEPH SMITH, Prophet, \&c., \&c. 
> 
>                              To Sharp & Gamble, DR.   
>   
> To one year's subscription to Western World, $3.00.

Come, Josey, fork over, and for mercy's sake don't get a revelation that
it is not to be paid. For if thou dost, we will send a prophet after
thee mightier than thou.”

Few journalists match the grade A premium all-American snark of ThomAss
Sharp. May of 1841 can be captured quite well in this single
correspondence between the Times and Seasons and ThoAss Sharp’s Warsaw
Signal. Jo was moving his political pawns into position, drawing up the
blueprints for Talos, laying the groundwork for an empire within an
empire, and amassing allies all along the way.

Let’s consider who it was that was sitting atop this massive empire. Jo
was a criminal. He’d been sued out of Kirtland for failing to pay his
bills and the majority of the church’s assets in Ohio had been seized by
creditors or the government after the KSS company failed. Jo had
absconded with hundreds of people’s money to Missouri where he’d racked
up a respectable rap sheet. Respectable or contemptable, depending on
which side of the conflict you found yourself. The Mormon war in
Missouri had ended with Jo and his acolytes being arrested and interred
for a period of 5 months. That jail sentence ended when Jo petitioned to
move the hearing to another location and he bought off the constables
with whiskey and they let him escape. Jo was being held at that time
under charges of high treason among other things and he escaped prison.

It’s not like Illinois was on a different continent. It wasn’t Illinois
on Mars, he was only a few hundred miles in multiple directions from
people who hated him and wanted him arrested or dead. Jo’s actions in
Kirtland was a barn fire, what he did in Missouri was an entire field
consumed in flames. The government had brought the blaze under control,
but there were still pockets smoldering and the air was filled with
embers. Now, in Illinois, those same trends and forces which cultivated
controllable fires in Ohio and Missouri were stronger than ever and the
embers drifting from Missouri were starting to land on religious
kindling and smoke a little bit. People who’d been burned before
couldn’t help but notice that if a real fire caught enough fuel in
Illinois, it could consume the whole nation. Enough embers will draw a
crowd of people trying to put it out.

The Missouri government finally had a fix on Jo. They knew where he was,
they knew where he spent most of his time, they knew the people with
whom he associated, they saw this back and forth between Jo and ThomAss
Sharp and knew he couldn’t get far from Nauvoo once they decided to
move. The Missouri state government had unfinished business when it came
to Jo and the Mormons. The sense of security and well-being the Mormons
had in Spring 1841 held on by a thin and very frayed thread.

Vogel HoC 4:364

Friday June 4, 1841….  
I called on Governor Carlin at his residence in Quincy. During my visit
with the Governor, I was treated with the greatest kindness and respect;
nothing was said about any requisition having come from the Governor of
Missouri for my arrest. In a very few hours after I had left the
Governor’s residence, he sent Thomas King, sheriff of Adams County,
Thomas Jasper, a constable of Quincy, and some others, as a posse, with
an officer from Missouri, to arrest me and deliver me up to the
authorities of Missouri.

Saturday June 5.—As I was on my return from Quincy, to which place I had
accompanied Presidents Hyrum Smith and William Law, on their mission to
the East, I was arrested at the Bear Creek Hotel, by two officers of
Justice, on a warrant from Governor Carlin, to deliver me up to the
authorities of Missouri”

Any feeling of permanence or well-being the Mormons felt about their
settlement and livelihood was immediately shattered. Jo and the Mormons
had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars and millions of man-hours to
construct Nauvoo, lay the cornerstones of the temple, and form their own
militia. They’d done everything right this time to escape persecution
from the government, but the skeletons from Jo’s past in Missouri rose
from the grave to ensnare him physically and destroy him spiritually.
The increasingly fickle sense of permanence tacitly implied that the
Mormons would be staying in Nauvoo for years, but just as that sense was
starting to feel fulfilled, it was once again shattered by perceived
government persecution. Jo was a criminal. Jo was a prophet of the Lord.
Whichever side of the conflict you found yourself, the Mormons were the
ones who suffered for the bad decisions of the leadership. Jo being
arrested and taken into the custody of a Missouri government official.
The nightmare was on repeat. Would the Mormons be chased out of Illinois
now? Would Jo even make it to Richmond, Missouri for the trial the
government had waiting for him, or would he be swarmed and killed by
angry mobs as soon as he step foot inside the state line? Or, would Jo
find some clever way to get out of this sticky wicket like he had every
other time in his life?

Patreon: next segment of Address to All Believers in Christ.

Joe Geisner NaMoHE

Thank you for birthday wishes

In Mormonism, we’re taught everything we need to pass on to our children
to raise them to be productive members of the church and society at
large. But what about when we leave the church? Where do we turn when we
don’t have a religion to raise up children in, and how do we foster a
love for a life without religion and God in the minds of our
progenitors? Our guest today has made an attempt at instilling a love of
science and skepticism through the medium of children’s science books.
He’s the author of the children book series Annabelle & Aiden and he’s
here with us on the line, please welcome J. R. Becker.
