---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 95 - LDS Inc.'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-95-lds-inc/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-95-lds-inc
category: History
date: 2018-03-23 02:37:30 +0000
---

Last episode said Thomas B. Marsh correct to Robert B. Thompson

This ep is just history. I'll be at the Protect LDS Children March next
week. That means next week's episode will be just a Mormon Leaks hour to
talk about the recent Joseph Bishop sexual assault leak. There's a lot
to say when it comes to the tape but we're going to let the dust settle
for another week before talking about it on this show. All I can say is
come to the damn march at the end of this month. This march is organized
to combat the fatal flaws in the Church which allowed this man to rape
multiple women in the MTC. Come. To. The. Protect LDS Children march on
March 30^th^!

Come to the fucking march!

Ep 95 -- LDS Inc.

On this episode, we examine when Jo's Mormonism became a business
venture as much as a religion. It didn't take long into Mormon history
before God felt the need to interfere with Church finances. From that
time forward, revelation after revelation centered on money just as much
as ecclesiastical matters. We discuss the nuances of the land contracts
Joseph Smith signed with Isaac Galland and Horace Hotchkiss to create a
sanctuary for the Mormon refugees to settle. How does the Church's
business-centric roots impact its operation and motives today? Let's
find out....

Links:

Lyndon Cook---Isaac Galland, Mormon Benefactor\
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/isaac-galland-mormon-benefactor>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Did Joseph Smith start Mormonism just for the money? It's a question
worth asking and one which isn't really answerable. At the latest
Sunstone Symposium, Mormon historian Christopher C. Smith made the
argument that Jo never intended on starting a religion, that it was
Oliver Cowdery's idea to begin the religion. According to Chris, Jo had
to be convinced to start Mormonism as his initial intention was to
publish the Book of Mormon and live off the sales. Chris's presentation
was compelling, but I think he was ignoring much of the Smith family
dynamic leading to the publishing of the Book of Mormon which may have
caused Jo to entertain the idea that starting a religion would be a good
idea.

The Smith family attended a number of religions prior to Mormonism's
inception. Methodism being the one we have unequivocal documentary
evidence of, but they may have attended multiple religions for varying
periods of time throughout Jo's teenage and early adult life. What were
more appealing than brick-and-mortar religions were public religious
revivals with altar calls, frequently held in town squares or public
assembly halls, sometimes just in large open fields. We wouldn't expect
to find any documentary evidence of the Smiths attending these open-air
revivals, but if they followed the religious world the way many of their
neighbors did, we can assume they attended at least a few of the larger
revivals in the Palmyra and Manchester area. They may have even
travelled to nearby Rochester, the largest shipping and trading city
within a day's journey from the Smiths.

With the completion of the Erie canal in 1826, a whole new mode of cheap
and efficient transportation opened Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, and
all other large cities on the shores of the Great Lakes to New York,
bringing in an influx of traders, businessman, and, most importantly for
our purposes, preachers.

The burned-over district, in which Joseph matured, was home to hundreds
of these religious revivals over the period from 1815-1835. The
preachers leading these revivals were often career preachers, making
their living from being the most charismatic preacher around, at least
until the next charismatic preacher came along.

The Smith family grew up on scraps, clothed in rags. They were
destitute. In fact, Joseph Sr. in the late 1810s actually spent 30 days
in a debtor's prison for failing to fulfill the obligations of a
business contract. The only way the Smiths were able to afford their
Manchester farmhouse was because Alvin Smith's industrious fortitude
making him able to pay the first two payments as cosigner for the land
deed. For a family growing up in poverty to see revival preachers with
tailored suits and their entourages of followers fawning over them, it
must have had a dramatic impact on the Smiths and Joseph Jr.
specifically. Sitting in the congregation and watching that collection
plate circulate the crowd with enough money to keep the Smith family fed
for months, what a dream it would be to have that coming to young Jo
instead of the finely-clothed priestcraft on the stage.

Fast forward to publishing the Book of Mormon, Martin Harris,
Not-So-Smarty-Marty, as we call him, mortgaged his farm to fund the
5,000 original copies. Jo heard that some people or organizations in
Canada were buying copyrights of history books. In response to this
unsubstantiated rumor, Jo sent, on two separate occasions, missionaries
to Canada to find a buyer for the Book of Mormon copyright. I think this
fact alone illustrates to us that Jo was motivated by whatever would
bring him in some fast cash, ignoring any long-term ramifications.

Not-so-smarty-Marty must have been a bit reluctant to make good on the
contract for the Book of Mormon because the first revelation in the Book
of Commandments which refers to anything monetary was directed as Marty.
This is the first time Jo's God interfered in money included in BoC 16,
modern D&C 19:

"11 For behold, the mystery of Godliness how great is it? for behold I
am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand, is endless
punishment, for endless is my name: 12 Wherefore-

13 Wherefore, I command you by my name, and by my Almighty power, that
you repent: repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my
wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore: 14 How sore you
know not! 15How exquisite you know not! 16 Yea, how hard to bear you
know not!

17 For behold, I God have suffered these things for all, that they might
not suffer, if they would repent,

but if they would not repent, they must suffer even as I:

25 And again: I command you, that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor\'s
wife. 26Nor seek thy neighbor\'s life.

27 And again: I command you, that thou shalt not covet thine own
property, but impart it freely to the printing of the book of Mormon,
which contains the truth and the word of God,

which is my word to Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew,
of which the Lamanites are a remnant; that they may believe the gospel,
and look not for a Messiah to come which has already come."

This was the first time God was forced to interfere with monetary
affairs concerning the Mormon religion. What follows throughout the rest
of the D&C are dozens of revelations commanding similar things to other
wealthy Mormons.

If we look to BoC chapter 26, modern D&C section 25, we see the genesis
of the first riff between Jo and Oliver Cowdery with this passage
directed to the prophet's wife:

"5 And thou shalt go with him at the time of his going, and be unto him
for a scribe, that I may send Oliver Cowdery whithersoever I will.

6 And thou shalt be ordained under his hand to expound scriptures, and
to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit:

7 For he shall lay his hands upon thee, and thou shalt receive the Holy
Ghost, and thy time shall be given to writing, and to learning much.

8 And thou needest not fear, for thy husband shall support thee from the
church:9 For unto them is his calling, that all things might be revealed
unto them, whatsoever I will according to their faith."

This revelation said that Jo would be supported by the Church and his
wife, Emma, wouldn't need to worry about money anymore because they had
a church with followers to fill their pockets. These two revelations
mark God's first interference into monetary affairs with the Jo's new
religion. The revelation we just read about Jo and Emma being supported
by the Church came along a mere 3 months after the Church was started in
1830.

Maybe this shouldn't be an issue, because the Church simply couldn't
operate without some kind of income. With all the projects undertaken by
the early Church, a steady flow of money was crucial to bring the
projects to light. Most of these projects were merely land acquisition
and building on said land, but one of the main purposes for needing
income came about as Jo's pallet for the upper class became increasingly
jaded against a mediocre lifestyle.

Even before this actual revelation came about, Jo was focused on getting
money from wealthy locals. When Jo first met NSSM Harris, Jo approached
Marty and told him that God had given Jo a revelation that the first
honest man he met would give him \$50. Granted, that \$50 in 1826 is
over \$1,100 in today's dollars, so that's a hefty sum, but that \$50
was a lot to the 20-year-old prophet at the time. Fast forward a mere
decade from 1826 and Jo is dealing with contracts and businesses worth
thousands of dollars. Expand that to encompass another 5 years and we
arrive in 1841 where our current timeline resides and Jo is throwing
around tens of thousands of dollars. But, that money was rarely liquid
specie. Most of the money Jo dealt with was in the form of mercantile
commodities or land deeds. New York Jo was working with 10s of dollars,
Nauvoo Jo a mere 10 years later was working with 10s of thousands of
dollars.

Let's spend a bit of time talking about Jo's financial portfolio in
1841.

From everything which transpired in Kirtland, Jo found himself
\$40-60,000 in debt. He fled the state, but those debts were still
attached. The city was able to seize the 3-story printing office
building next to the Kirtland Temple to absolve some of the debts, but
the building was burned to the ground by an unknown arsonist as soon as
it was auctioned off to one of Jo's many creditors.

Church finances in Missouri were in no-better shape than that of
Kirtland. The Mormons had been squatting with the hopes of purchasing
Missouri land for extremely cheap. When the land they were squatting on
came up for auction, much of it was purchased by gentile Missourians who
wanted the Mormons off their newly acquired land. This was one of many
factors which caused the Missourians to remove the Mormons and send them
out of the state.

During Jo's internment in Liberty Jail, he shared a bit of letter
correspondence with one Isaac Galland, who had deeds to thousands of
acres in Iowa and Illinois right on the Mississippi. He had the deeds to
the land, but that unfortunately didn't mean a whole lot as the land
ownership in Iowa had been so much speculated on that simply having a
deed in-hand didn't grant total ownership.

Galland owned some 20,000 acres in what was known as the half-breed
tract in Iowa. This land had been acquired after the Government executed
the teeth of the Indian Removal Act and relocated the thousands of
Native Americans living in the Iowa territory. This half-breed tract was
the source of land speculation as businessmen vacillated between
investing in the area in hopes of it becoming a new metropolis with high
land values and dumping their holdings when they saw how undesirable the
land was and extrapolated accurate conclusions of the area's lack of
appeal.

Land deeds were traded back and forth constantly and courts were forced
to get involved to make small settlements based on the incredibly
confusing nature of these trades. Often times, one man, let's say Steve,
would purchase a land deed for a few hundred acres from another man,
Bill, who had previously purchased a few thousand acres and broken up
the land into smaller lots for split-sales. Then Steve would subdivide
out his few hundred acres and sell them off at slightly raised value to
a third party, John, who may have been purchasing multiple blocks of
hundreds of acres in order to consolidate the land into a single block
to sell for an exorbitant rate. Each of these steps would increase the
dollar/acre value of the land, but nobody was settling the area en masse
to justify the inflation. Then somebody, Dave, would approach to the
original owner of the thousands of acres, Bill, before Steve and John
purchased their land after they subdivided and consolidated the land and
Dave would accuse Bill of having a fraudulent land deed and contend the
land belonged to Dave in the first place, and resolve the issue in
court. The court would rule the Bill's deed to be fraudulent, committing
the land to Dave who brought the accusation of fraud because he had an
earlier deed in his hands which showed all the acreage was actually his.
But at the end of it all, it turns out that Dave DID actually sell his
land to Bill in the first place, but Bill lost the paperwork so he can't
prove that Dave sold the land to him. Now all the land deeds with Bill,
Steve, and John's names are nullified by a court and Dave retains all
their land with his original deed. Then, it turns out that the original
deed Dave presented to the court to get all the land back was actually
fraudulent because Mark, who sold the original land to Dave before Bill,
John, and Steve got involved, simply fabricated his land deeds to lay
claim to thousands of acres he got on trade from a Black Hawk war
veteran, who initially was given his thousands of acres by the
government, because Mark gave the veteran a nice place to live in
Springfield, Illinois. But, of course, Dave, Bill, John, and Steve all
feel like they got screwed over by each other when it was Mark's fault
in the first place for laying claim with fraudulent land deeds all
because he made a handshake deal with that war veteran.

This hypothetical made up the majority of land disputes in the
half-breed tract and caused a lot of hard feelings and unfair court
rulings when they attempted to nullify the chaos and reduce the
speculation. All one must do is replace the names of these men with
actual companies, like the New York Land Company, who were practicing
this speculation on a large scale and it's perfectly applicable.

One man caught up in all the speculation was one Isaac Galland, with
whom the Prophet had shared correspondence from Liberty Jail. Jo had
agreed to buy Galland's 20 thousand acres of half-breed tract in Iowa.
I'll let Lyndon W. Cook from BYU studies take it away from here giving a
brief synopsis of Galland's professional career in land speculation.
You'll find a link to the entire article, Isaac Galland---Mormon
Benefactor, in the show notes.

"After unsuccessfully running for the Iowa state legislature in 1834 251
isaac galland began his notorious career of land speculation in Iowa
much of Galland's land dealings involved the halfbreed tract a 119000
acre parcel of land lying between the Des Moines and Mississippi rivers
in the southeast cornerm of iowa which had been set aside as a
reservation for halfbreed half breed sac and fox indians an despite the
questionable legality of land transactions in the halfbreed half breed
tract the area was soon flooded with settlers and land speculators in
1836 the New York Land company, later to merge with the st louis land
company made extensive land purchases in the reservation isaac galland
was one of five trustees for the new york land company he also purchased
large tracts of land in his own name both in the halfbreed half breed
reservation er and in commerce hancock county illinois dr galland who at
one time was appointed special land commissioner for hancock county also
platted the original town of keokuk in 1837...

Isaac Galland's association with the mormons cormons began in october or
november of 1838 when he met israel barlow who with other mormons
cormons had fled northeastward towards quincy illinois from far west
missouri but by missing their way had arrived at the des moines river in
iowa they observed the abandoned barracks of old fort des moines near
what is now montrose and were informed that isaac galland held extensive
claims to this area known as the halfbreed half breed tract israel
barlow and his associates talked with dr galland who after hearing of
the mormons cormons Mormons difficulties in missouri began negotiations
with these destitute mor mons to sell them his lands and buildings in
commerce as well as in the halfbreed half breed tract not authorized to
make purchases for the church elder barlow directed his course
downstream to quincy after an exploring party had been sent to examine
Gallands lands church leaders convened in quincy to discuss the
propriety of settling in commerce and in lee county iowa william marks
presided at this meeting where isaac Galland's liberal offer was
presented dr galland had agreed to sell about twenty thousand acres
lying between the mississippi and des moines rivers at two dollars per
acre to be paid in twenty annual installments without interest..."

Isaac Galland was paramount to the Mormon settlement and he converted to
Mormonism, likely out of self-interest to ensure his business
transaction went through. Galland lobbied on behalf of the refugee
Mormons by petitioning his friends, Attorney General Isaac Van Allen and
Governor Robert Lucas of Iowa Territory, that they would allow the
transaction to be completed and allow the Mormons to begin settlement in
the Iowa territory. In Galland's letter to Governor Lucas dated 25 Feb
1839, he said the following:

"I will come to the issue at once and ask on behalf of these much
injured people your permission that they may purchase lands and settle
thereon in the territory of iowa and there to worship almighty god
according to the dictates of their own consciences secure from the
robbers grasp the ruffians gun and the midnight assassins knife."

Permission was granted by the Governor, sharply contrasting the favors
the Mormons had received from Missouri Governor, Lilburn Boggs, when he
signed the Mormon Extermination Order. Jo signed the Galland contracts
and the Mormons were now on the hook for \$50,000 in exchange for 20,000
acres in Iowa. Just as in our little hypothetical, Galland's ownership
of these contracted lands was highly disputed, yet he sold it anyway. A
brief footnote in Lyndon Cook's paper offers the history of how the
half-breed tract became a major source of confusion for land speculators
and the court systems trying to rectify their mistake from when the land
was initially appropriated.

"Congress in august 1824 had reserved this tract of land by treaty for
the use of the mixed bloods of the sac and fox indian tribes. The united
states maintained a revisionary interest in the land and under the terms
of the treaty the half breeds could not legally sell or convey the land.
In the fall of 1833 a group of half breeds met in keokuk and prepared a
petition to congress requesting the passage of an act giving them right
to sell the land. Pursuant to this petition congress passed an act dated
30 june 1834 which relinquished the federal governments revisionary
interest in the half breed tract and gave the half breeds the lands in
fee simple. Congress failed to specify who the individual owners were,
however originally 40 claims were made for ownership. Later the number
reached 100 and finally 160. To rectify this mistake, the wisconsin
legislature in 1838 required all claimants to file claims with the
district court of lee county within one year showing how title was
obtained. Three commissioners were to take testimony regarding said
titles. In the meantime, the territory of iowa was created and the first
session of the territorial legislature repealed the wisconsin act. This
action complicated the problem and suits were subsequently filed in the
territorial courts resulting in the sale of the entire tract of 119,000
acres to hugh T reid for \$5,773.32. Reid, who received a deed executed
by the sheriff of lee county, subsequently sold several small tracts but
his title was obviously in question and became involved in litigation.
This matter came before the second session of the territorial
legislature, but nothing concrete occurred until 1841 in spaulding v
antaya US district court of iowa territory which requested partition of
the entire tract. A decree for partition was issued and commissioners
were appointed to divide the 119,000 acres into 101 tracts of equal
value. This was done and confirmed by the courts in october 1841. This
judgment of partition was sustained in a number of appeals to the iowa
supreme court but the sheriffs sale to hugh T reid still formed a cloud
on that title. In webster v reid in district court of iowa in january
1846 it was decided that hugh T reid was the owner in fee simple of the
land in question. An appeal was taken to the united states supreme court
and in 1850 the high court reversed webster v reid. This action set
aside the sheriffs sale to reid and sustained the judgment of partition
i.e. 101 shares. Lawyers for the various land companies quit-claimed
their interests in these lands for a reasonable consideration; the
matter was finally settled."

Ownership of this Iowa land was steadily in dispute until 6 years after
Joseph's Carthage shootout assassination. Galland didn't seem too
dissuaded from buying and selling the land to the Mormons, even with
this cloud of chaos underlying every deed transaction concerning these
119,000 acres in Iowa.

Galland's motivations seem clarified by an extant letter he wrote a mere
half-month after his conversion to Mormonism, also included in this
article by Cook:

"I feel greatly relieved in having got out of hearing of the Half Breed
Lands... I have disposed of my half breed lands, for 50 thousand
dollars, that is to say \$2500 annually for 20 years... The people
\[Mormons\] have also bought out Hugh White and some others, and will
probably continue to buy out the settlers of that neighborhood, until
they again acquire a sufficient quantity of "honey comb" to induce the
surrounding thieves to rob them again; at which time they will no doubt
have to renounce their religion; or submit to a repetition of similar
acts of violence, and outrage \[as they suffered in Missouri\]."

Galland was relieved of his burden of the half-breed tract ownership and
was set to collect a handsome sum from the Mormons every year for 20
years from his land speculation. Regardless of how large an institution
you're running, \$2,500 (adjusted for inflation \~\$57,700) every year
in the 1840s was a lot of money for one guy to collect and one
organization to divvy out. But Galland wasn't the only one with
contracts signed by Jo compelling the Mormons to pay out massive sums of
money. Always keep this small detail in mind, Jo was signing all of
these under his own name, it wasn't until late 1840 when he was named
Trustee-in-Trust of Church finances, but every contract at that time
allowing the Mormons to settle on any land in Illinois and Iowa, those
were all in Jo's personal name. Historians have attempted painstakingly
to reconstruct the tangled web of finances Jo was involved in during his
Nauvoo stay, but it simply cannot be done. One issue making much of this
reconstruction effort significantly more difficult is just how many
deals Jo made without properly filing paperwork with local government
authorities. Most of the contracts were drawn up and signed, and simply
squirreled away in one of many filing boxes, and the mess Jo left behind
was one of Emma and Louis Bidamon's greatest sources of frustration and
contention.

Add in to this mess the fact that Jo's debts from Ohio and Missouri
didn't go anywhere. Jo was still on the hook for tens of thousands of
dollars from the previous decade of being the Prophet in Chief.

January 15, 1841, an issue of the Times & Seasons went out in
celebration of the great fortunes the Saints were enjoying. Jo made it a
point to praise the behavior of Galland when he said this, from the
Vogel HoC 4:267:

"Dr. Isaac Galland also, who is one of our benefactors, having under his
control a large quantity of land in the immediate vicinity of our city,
and a considerable portion of the city plot, opened both his heart and
his hands, and 'when we were strangers, took us in,' and bade us welcome
to share with him in his abundance, leaving his dwelling house, the most
splendid edifice in the vicinity, for our accommodation, and partook
himself to a small uncomfortable dwelling. He sold us his large estates
on very reasonable terms, and on long credit, so that we might have an
opportunity of paying for them without being distressed, and has since
taken our lands in Missouri in payment for the whole amount, and has
given us a clear and indisputable title for the same. And in addition to
the first purchase, we have exchanged lands with him in Missouri to the
amount of eighty thousand dollars. He is the honored instrument the Lord
used to prepare a home for us when we were driven from our inheritances,
having given him control of vast bodies of land, and prepared his heart
to make the use of it the Lord intended he should."

Jo was clearly using his power of discernment to decide whether or not
these land purchase agreements were legitimate or not.

Put a pin in Galland for a minute, we'll pick up with him once we
sufficiently discuss the Hotchkiss land agreement. Another land
speculator who approached the Mormon refugees was Horace Hotchkiss.
We've briefly discussed both Galland and Hotchkiss in episode 72,
Nauvoo: Divine Inspeculation, if you'd like to get an introduction to
this subject. Hugh and William White, Isaac Galland, Horace Hotchkiss
and a small number of other land speculators were drawn to the
investment opportunity presenting itself with the Mormons moving to Iowa
and Illinois en masse.

Hotchkiss owned a few hundred acres of Commerce when he approached the
Mormons with his deal. From Robert Flander's Nauvoo Kingdom on the
Mississippi, beginning with page 41:

"The "Hotchkiss Purchase" was for Smith and the Church the greatest
business venture since the Kirtland Bank. Hotchkiss apparently knew a
city when he saw one coming upon his property; accordingly the price was
high, considering the approaching deflation and monetary stringency. The
purchase was in the form of a land contract, the Church to have
possession of the property but not the deeds until the debt was paid.
Apparently no money was paid down, and the terms were entailed in a
series of notes. Two notes of \$25,000, one maturing in ten and one in
twenty years, seem to have been the principle. There were forty
additional notes of \$1,500 each, two of which were due every twelve
months for twenty years. These were apparently the interest: eight per
cent a year simple interest on \$50,000. There were two additional notes
of \$1,250, one due in five years and the other in ten. So the Church
was to pay the Hotchkiss partners \$3,000 each year for twenty years,
plus \$1,250 the fifth year, \$26,250 the tenth year, and \$25,000 the
twentieth year... The total amount was \$114,500. Smith subsequently
claimed that Hotchkiss had agreed verbally that no interest was to be
charged, but the contracts do not suggest any such agreement."

The most complicated issue with all these land agreements was the fact
that the Church and Jo had absolutely no capital to throw at these
ventures. Jo simply signed the contracts with no down-payments with the
understanding that the terms were sufficient enough to forego interest
payments. This Horace Hotchkiss guy seems to be a standup businessman by
the few available indicators, we can't say the same of Isaac Galland.
Hotchkiss spent years in Nauvoo trying to make Jo stick to the contracts
they'd signed in late 1839. Hotchkiss was measured and realistic in his
approach with dealing with the Mormons, knowing full-well their
financial situation and the hardships they were suffering since being
exiled from Missouri.

Let's take the pin back out of Galland and catch up with him. As Galland
was reasonably well connected in politics and land speculation, he was
appointed to the office of land agent for the Church after his baptism
and subsequently spent much of late 1839 to early 1841 travelling to
sort out the complex web of assets and liabilities Jo had woven in the
past decade of his dealings as prophet of the new religion.

Much of the reasoning behind his travelling was due to self-interest.
While no extant documents prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that Jo
successfully traded land the Mormons already possessed in order to
reconcile the contracts with Galland, a few notes show payment to
Galland in the form of land contracts in Missouri and Ohio, but these
few documents only reconcile a few thousand dollars of the outstanding
original \$50,000 figure.

One of Jo's earliest revelations is included in D&C 38 today, was
delivered in January 1831, less than a year after the Church was
started. It says in part:

"28 Wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment, that ye
should go to the Ohio: and there I will give unto you my law, and there
you shall be endowed with power from on high,

and from thence, whomsoever I will shall go forth among all nations, and
it shall be told them what they shall do, for I have a great work laid
up in store:...

30 And now I give unto the church in these parts, a commandment, that
certain men among them shall be appointed, and they shall be appointed
by the voice of the church;

and they shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their
relief, that they shall not suffer; and send them forth to the place
which I have commanded them;

and this shall be their work, to govern the affairs of the property of
this church.

And they that have farms, that can not be sold, let them be left or
rented as seemeth them good."

This revelation seems to exhibit Jo's simple lack of understanding basic
economics. This was a divine command for everybody in New York to sell
the property and goods and immediately move to Ohio. If they can't sell
their property, they should rent it out. Sure, this revelation may work
on an individual basis, but there were somewhere around 100 Mormons at
this time and just throwing this revelation out there carte blanch shows
an inability to empathize with just how challenging it is to pick up
roots.

Before we get into the meat of our 1841 historical timeline today, we
need to take a quick break.

This revelation for everybody to pick up everything and move, among a
small handful of others, meant that Mormons had land and property
holdings scattered all across the eastern states in 1841. In order to
pay for the Nauvoo contracts, Jo decided it was high time to tap into
all those resources, especially in Missouri and Ohio. Luckily for Jo and
his fellow land speculators, the Mormons had just compiled at the end of
1839 itemized lists of their property they left behind when they were
violently removed from the state of Missouri. This folder of affidavits
was compiled to petition the U.S. government for remuneration, but by
the Summer of 1841, it was widely understood that the Government had no
interest in paying the Mormons for their sufferings, especially not to
the tune of \$1mn as they were petitioning for. That already-compiled
data was used to set prices on the land they'd left behind in Missouri
in order to pay Hotchkiss, Galland, and White for all the property
they'd signed over to Jo.

There's a certain logic to what Jo was trying to do with these
incredibly complex land agreements. The Mormons who followed Jo weren't
using their land in Ohio and Missouri anymore and there were hundreds or
thousands of acres in those states attached to Mormons who were actively
settling in Nauvoo, Illinois, they didn't need the land anymore. So, if
Jo could sign these various contracts for Illinois and Iowa land and
sell off or trade Mormon land in Missouri and Ohio in exchange, he's
unloading unwanted liabilities while gaining capital where he wants it.
Even if he could sell the unused land and pay off the contracts, it
would alleviate some of the principle and reduce the overbearing stress
Jo was experiencing being so far in debt. Isaac Galland was on board
with the trading business, Hotchkiss seemed to want cash instead.

As a certified land agent for the Church, Galland set out possibly in
late 1839, maybe in early 1840, to collect land deeds from Mormons in
the eastern states who owned land in Missouri and Ohio, in order to
capitalize on some of the contracts he'd signed with Jo. A fatal flaw in
this plan was realized when Galland spent inordinate amounts of time in
Kirtland, Ohio without much letter correspondence between him and the
prophet. Jo must have realized at some point that not only was he on the
hook to pay Galland \$50,000 for the various contracts, but that Galland
held much of the financial future of the Church in his hands while he
was out petitioning people to sign over their land to Jo in order to pay
back Galland. Jo was also trying to make good on the contracts with
Horace Hotchkiss, who waxed impatient with the Prophet's lack of liquid
capital.

As Flanders noted in his book, for whatever reason, Jo was under the
impression that the deal with Hotchkiss didn't include any interest.
According to Jo, he and Hotchkiss had a verbal agreement that it was
principle alone included in the contracts, yet the contracts themselves
seem to bare out the fact that 8 percent interest was steadily accruing
on Jo's tab with Hotchkiss and that \$114,000 amount just kept growing.
Jo relied on Isaac Galland to acquire the deeds to pay the Hotchkiss
bills, but what he was able to collect couldn't even cover the interest.

By the summer of 1841, Hotchkiss had only been paid back pennies on the
dollar so far with the accruing interest soaking up more than Jo could
pay off. Jo needed Galland to deliver on acquiring some of the Mormon
lands to be able to trade towards the outstanding balances. Galland
spent an inordinate amount of time in Kirtland, Ohio. Now if we recall
back, Kirtland was the HQ of the church from 1831-'37, and hundreds of
Mormons still lived there who were considered to be in apostasy by Jo's
Nauvoo Church. Part of Galland's mission was also to procure loans from
Mormons abroad, partially to pay back the contracts, but more so to fund
the publication of the 1840 Nauvoo BoM, and other printed materials, the
Nauvoo House project, the Temple, and other public projects Nauvoo
needed in order to become a sustainable community.

From 128 of Flanders' Nauvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi:

"Perhaps of all the perplexities of temporal affairs, none made Joseph
Smith more anxious to return to the responsibilities of the spirit than
the Hotchkiss indebtedness. The correspondence between the Church and
the Connecticut land dealer from whom the Church had purchased the large
tract on "the flat" on land contract in 1839 chronicles the fiscal
problems of Nauvoo and the tortured attempts made to solve them.
Hotchkiss was delicate but persistent about his interest in the Saints'
pecuniary affairs and their ability to retire the \$3,000 in notes due
to mature each twelvemonth."

At the time when Hotchkiss' first payment became due, Jo had just
returned from D.C. in his petition to get redress for the saints'
suffering during their exodus from Missouri. Flanders continues:

"The Saints entertained great expectations that there would be some
substantial settlement made; indeed, that was the implicit object of the
petitions. Hotchkiss had been assured that the success of this project
would underwrite the Nauvoo land purchase."

That was the plan all along in Jo's mind. Sign all these land contracts,
get a huge payout from the Government, pay them all back, then build
Nauvoo without going into debt. Go back to episodes 58, Fop or a Fool
for POTUS, and 61, Congressional Deafening, to get the backstory on how
this petition to the government went. Suffice it to say, after weeks of
lobbying, the Mormons received no redress for their plight and Jo's
entire plan fell apart. However, he'd already signed all the contracts
and first payments were coming due in the very near future.

Horace Hotchkiss was well aware that the government had denied helping
the Mormons financially and he seemed aware that he was supposed to be
repaid from that money that suddenly wouldn't be coming. As soon as the
government officially denied paying the Mormons, Hotchkiss was, from
that time forward, stuck with the Mormons. As the first payment came due
to Hotchkiss, Jo decided to appeal to Hotchkiss' emotion, claiming the
Mormons' industriousness was plenty capital to repay the debt.

"The greatest reliance you have for regaining your wealth is in the
honorable conduct of your people---their pure morals---their correct
habits---their indefatigable industry---their untiring
perseverance---and their well directed enterprise. These constitute a
capital which can never be shaken by man."

According to Flanders, Hotchkiss' concerns were assuaged by this claim
that the Mormons were a good hearted and industrious people which caused
Hotchkiss to propose another land transaction between himself and the
prophet, to which the prophet responded from the HoC 4:100

"It would afford me great pleasure indeed, could I hold out any prospect
of the two notes \[for \$1,500 each\] due next month being met at
maturity, or even this fall. Having had considerable difficulty
(necessarily consequent on a new settlement) to contend with, as well as
poverty and considerable sickness, our first payment will be probably
somewhat delayed, until we again get a good start in the world . . . the
prospect is indeed favorable. However, every exertion on our part shall
be made to meet the demands against us, so that if we cannot accomplish
all we wish to, it is our misfortune, and not our fault."

That was a letter sent in July of 1840, and tensions between the Prophet
and his various business partners in land speculation rose. Hotchkiss
became more insistent which coincided with Galland becoming increasingly
harder to get ahold of. To review the complex web of land deals being
traded, Flanders summarizes with the following:

"The technique was to send agents among the Saints in the East to
convince them to move to Nauvoo, and to give them bills of exchange for
the titles to their property. These bills could be cashed in Nauvoo for
lots or farm lands of comparable value. The agents would give the titles
to eastern lands thus acquired to Hotchkiss in an amount sufficient to
pay the notes due him, and if possible sell the rest. Hotchkiss agreed
to this arrangement."

This was the initial agreement. However, once Hotchkiss understood the
cumbersome and delayed nature by which this would return his investment,
he changed his mind. From Lyndon Cook's article on Isaac Galland:

"Since Horace Hotchkiss had verbally agreed to accept land in the
Atlantic States in lieu of cash payments, Joseph Smith was optimistic
that his land agents could completely cancel the Hotchkiss debt (both
principal and interest). Upon speaking with Mr. Hotchkiss, prior to
Hyrum's departure, the two agents found that he had changed his mind and
that he would only accept land titles for the intersest which was
accruing. Upon receiving this information, Dr. \[Isaac\] Galland agreed
to effect the transfer of sufficient eastern lands to Hotchkiss to meet
the accruing interest (\$6,000 by the summer of 1841)."

It was at this time that the relationship between Jo and Galland soured.
Jo was under the impression that Galland would transfer property to
Hotchkiss to make good on the accruing interest, but Galland had other
plans in mind. You can sense the rising tension in letter exchanges
shared between Hotchkiss and Jo throughout 1841 and into early 1842.

After Jo had received a letter from Hotchkiss with some rather strong
persuasions to work harder to acquire money to pay the interest on the
loans, Jo fired back a letter in July 1841 which reads in part from the
Vogel HoC 4:402

"Dear Sir:\-- I presume you are well aware of the difficulties that
occurred before, and at the execution of the writings in regard to the
landed transaction between us, touching the annual payment of interest:
if you have forgotten, I will here remind you, you verbally agreed on
our refusal and hesitancy to execute the notes for the payment for the
land, that you would not exact the payment of the interest that would
accrue on them under five years, and that you would not coerce the
payment even then; to all this you pledged your honor; and upon an after
arrangement you verbally agreed to take land in some one of the Atlantic
States, that would yield six per cent interest (to you) both for the
principal and interest, and in view of that matter I delegated my
brother Hyrum and Doctor Isaac Galland to go East and negotiate for
lands with our friends, and pay you off for the whole purchase that we
made of you; but upon and interview with you, they learned that you were
unwilling to enter into an arrangement according to the powers that I
had delegated to them; that you would not receive any of the principal
at all, but the interest alone, which we never considered ourselves in
honor or in justice bound to pay under the expiration of five years. I
presume you are no stranger to the part of the city plat we bought of
you being a deathly sickly hole, and that we have not been able in
consequence, to realize any valuable consideration from it, although we
have been keeping up appearances, and holding out inducements to
encourage immigration, that we scarcely think justifiable in consequence
of the mortality that almost invariably awaits those who come from far
distant parts (and that with a view to enable us to meet our
engagements), and now to be goaded by you, for a breach of good faith,
and neglect, and dishonorable conduct, seems to me to be almost beyond
endurance..."

The rest of the letter details the plight of the refugee saints and what
they suffered at the hands of the Missouri government and concludes with
a post script which reads as such:

"Since writing the above, I have had a conference with my Bro. Hyrum,
who informs me that when he left Pennsylvania that he left with Doc.
\[Isaac\] Galland nearly enough of real estate (in the hands of the
Doctor) to liquidate the amount due you. My Bro. having been compelled
to return, in consequence of ill health expecting that the doctor would
have the matter arranged long before this. Therefore so soon as we learn
the particulars from Dr. Galland, we will take such measures as will
most likely meet your approval."

After a few months in the eastern states acquiring land deeds and
donations for various Nauvoo projects, Isaac Galland finally returned
west to Keokuk, Iowa. He'd been essentially silent with any
correspondence with the Prophet and Jo had only learned of what had
transpired through his brother, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. Telling of
his absence, Flanders details how Galland's silence caused much of the
rift between Horace Hotchkiss and Jo from 132 of Kingdom on the
Mississippi:

"Smith hoped by pleas, threats, exaggerations, and repeated assurances
to avoid being pressed too closely or brought to a reckoning by
'coercive measures' that would be embarrassing if not disastrous. But he
was upset just then by another matter to which he did not allude in the
letter to Hotchkiss---the disappearance of Galland with money and land
titles in his possession...

\[Galland\] had the confidence of Smith and was a natural choice to be
one of the agents to trade for eastern lands and handle the Hotchkiss
payments. But it was partly if not primarily his malfeasance that caused
the sharp exchange of letters between Hotchkiss and the Prophet. Smith
Tuttle, one of the Hotchkiss partners, wrote the Mormon leader in
September a soothing letter which detailed Galland's failure to follow
through on his promises. In light of Tuttle's explanation, replied
Smith, 'my feelings are changed, and I think that you all had cause for
complaining.' Brother Hyrum had been forced by ill health to return to
Nauvoo, leaving the whole of the business in Galland's hands. 'Why he
has not done according to my instructions,' wrote Smith, 'God only
knows...' The prophet, though worried, was not yet ready to admit that
the esteemed Doctor might have absconded with the funds.

Once Jo had learned of Galland's return to the West, he immediately
wrote the Doctor asking for his company in a conference. They shared
strongly-worded correspondence and the phrasing Jo used seems to exhibit
that he thought Galland might have something to hide.

Jo's first letter to Galland is not extant, but Galland's reply follows
which I'm reading from Cook's article, Isaac Galland---Mormon
benefactor:

"'... I enjoy a moderate degree of health, and shall certainly give
myself the pleasure in a few days of visiting my brethren and friends at
Nauvoo. I am now awaiting the arrival of a Gentleman from St. Louis whom
I have promised to meet at this place on very important business... As
soon as I have met him and made arrangements, I shall proceed to an
immediate interview with you.'

After one month had passed and Dr. Galland had not arrived in Nauvoo,
Joseph Smith was led to write:

'I am verry much in want of assistance at this particular time, and if
you can make it convenient to call on me within two or three days I
shall be much pleased, if not I wish you would send by the bearer all
the funds you possibly can as my wants are verry great.'

Dr. Galland penned the following reply to the bottom half of the
Prophet's note:

'... I am at a loss to determine whether you intended it as an absolute
dun or as an appeal to my liberality to advance fund for your relief,
but let it be either case, I assure you sire, it is not in my power to
advance at this time 5 dollars until I obtain it from my creditors or in
some other way. As to coming to Nauvoo, I have long desired to come
there, and shall certainly do so as soon as I can so arrange the matters
which I am now engaged in.'"

The letter exchange lasted for the last few months of 1841 and it wasn't
until January of 1842 that Galland finally returned to Nauvoo. Jo was
anxious to get ahold of the deeds and funds Galland had collected as an
agent of the Church. It couldn't be ignored that Galland held
significant leverage over Jo and the Church. He'd sold them tens of
thousands of acres in Iowa and Nauvoo, Jo was on the hook to repay
Galland \$50,000 over a twenty-year period.

Picking up in Flanders' Kingdom on the Mississippi pg. 132:

"In a letter to Hotchkiss on December 10 \[1841\] Smith referred to 'the
inefficiency, neglect, or sickness of Dr. Galland' as a cause of their
difficulty. When Galland finally returned to the vicinity of Nauvoo,
apparently in December or January \[1842\], bringing him to account
proved difficult. On January 17 and 18, Smith and Galland exchanged
letters, neither of which is extant. Galland's language apparently
served to warn Smith that if Galland were pressed for a close accounting
of his agency he might in return call for debts due him from the Church.
He was certainly in a position to cause an uproar and a scandal over the
complex credit arrangements within the Church; perhaps he threatened
foreclosure on Iowa lands as well."

The conciliatory wording of Jo's letter in response to the
correspondence which is no longer extant shows that Jo fully grasped the
situation. Galland owned a ton of land the Mormons had merely settled on
with the promise to eventually pay. Jo had no liquid cash to make good
on the defaulted payments he'd missed with Galland and Hotchkiss.
Galland still held the deeds to all the lands the Mormons had settled
on, yet Jo relied on Galland to collect land deeds and donations from
Mormons in the east to pay back Hotchkiss, who was much more scrupulous
with his business practices than Galland. This was terrifyingly complex
and each piece of the equation relied on every other piece for the whole
thing to work. Unfortunately, as so often happened for Jo, when he
orchestrated this web of land speculation, everything quickly fell apart
and Jo alone was left to blame for the fallout of all this chaos.

In January of 1842, in response to Galland not making a full account of
the funds he'd collected, Jo revoked his status as agent of the Church.
Isaac Galland was seldom heard from again in the annals of Mormon
history.

Let's just review everything we've seen of Galland's trajectory in his
Church career in the brief 2 years he associated with the Mormons.
Galland saw an opportunity to get comfortably wealthy from the Mormon
refugees moving to an area where he held significant acreage in 1839. He
was able to convince Jo he was a stand-up guy and acting in good faith,
so the prophet signed various contracts with him for roughly 20,000
acres at \$2.5/acre totaling roughly \$50,000. Realizing that Mormons
are more likely to do business with fellow Mormons, Galland was baptized
into the Church in late 1839 and given Elder status almost immediately
as he was appointed land agent on behalf of the Church. He spent the
following 2 years handling land transactions whilst proselyting. It's
worth mentioning at this point that Galland actually authored and
published a few tracts about Mormonism from Ohio and Pennsylvania. His
missions weren't just land acquisition, he also spread the good word and
shared the plight of the Mormon refugees whilst travelling about.
Finally, by the end of 1841 and beginning of 1842, Galland was on the
Prophet's bad side, possibly having stole hundreds or thousands from the
Church. Unfortunately, it's not easy to say he stole that money from the
Church without qualifying it. His monetary obligations and relationship
with the Church was far more complicated than just saying he stole from
the Church to sufficiently explain what happened. Galland had used
Church funds he'd personally collected to fund the various tracts and
articles he'd published. He likely used Church money he'd collected to
fund the living expenses of his mission, and he probably lived rather
comfortably.

Let's also examine what the main purpose of his mission was. He was sent
to the Mormons living in eastern states to tell them of how great Nauvoo
was and petition them to move to Nauvoo and sign their land deeds over
to him. Those Mormons didn't know who Isaac Galland was. Granted, Hyrum
Sidekick-Abiff and a few other trusted elites accompanied him at various
times during these missions, but Galland was a new Mormon on the block,
what reason did they have to trust him? Also try to take their mentality
into consideration. These were Mormons who hadn't followed Jo from
Kirtland to Missouri or to Illinois in the first place. They were
apathetic when it came to divine dictates to pick up everything and
start a new life in a brand new location, yet suddenly this Galland guy
comes along and tells them that Jo and the Mormons are building a new
settlement in Illinois this time. What reason did they have to believe
that the Mormons wouldn't be chased out of Illinois and Iowa just as
they had from Missouri? It was those apathetic Mormons' friends and
family who'd settled in Missouri only to be removed from the State a
mere year after putting down roots. They saw what had happened, what was
to stop it all from happening again?

Many of the settlers were also aware that the Mississippi was a
disease-ridden swampland. There weren't any major agricultural
operations, no factories, no infrastructure awaiting them should they
decide to move to the new settlements, and they were living comfortable
lives where they already were. What was the appeal to pack up and start
a new life except for pleasing the Prophet and his wacky speculations?
These factors and the general apathy of the Mormons with whom Galland
was meeting doomed his mission from the very beginning.

Galland collected as many land deeds and donations he could but I can
only imagine he was met with extremely limited success. With an accruing
debt of nearly \$200,000 dollars in Jo's name, even if every one of the
ten thousand Mormons at this time gave 10 bucks, they'd only be half way
to paying it off. It's realistic to assume that maybe 3-5% of Mormons
gave anything to Galland in all his time. Maybe some gave as much as a
few hundred dollars or signed over a few dozen acres of land, that
couldn't make even the slightest of a dent in the debts Jo had acquired
in the past 2 years of Mormonism alone. That says nothing of his past
debts from Ohio and Missouri still plaguing him every time he turned
around.

As was the case with all of Mormon history, Jo was in dire straits. His
straits seemed to widen and encompass more people and larger debts as he
progressed, but they were always utterly and completely dire. Chaos was
the only ruling constant throughout all Mormon history. Unfortunately
for Jo and, by extension, all the Mormons, Jo didn't live by his own
principle when he wrote to Galland in attempting to acquire the funds
after Galland's mission, "Short reckonings make long friends".

With all this information in front of us, when did Jo's religious
endeavor become a financial enterprise? What caused Jo to spend so much
time and effort on money? Just how much time and effort did he spend on
money and failed business ventures instead of on his religion? When did
the balance shift where he spent more time being a businessman instead
of prophet? At what point did profit become his primary focus instead of
BEING prophet? Did Joseph Smith start Mormonism just for the money?

Jo's childhood and teenage years were spent in destitution. He spent
much of his time attending churches and open-air revivals watching the
preachers collect plates of money from the congregations. So, did Jo
start Mormonism just for the money? Maybe. A lot of factors went into
founding the Mormon religion and nobody could say that the prospect of
making a lot of money wasn't one of the primary factors.

At the end of the day, does it really matter if Jo had money on his mind
when he started the Church? Speculation surrounding this subject says
nothing of the modern-day LDS Church. Sure, it's fun to point to various
revelations and show just how early into the foundation of the Church
God decided to intervene with monetary affairs, but that exercise
doesn't make the Church today any more or less a business. That's what
it is, The Corporation of the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. It's a multi-billion-dollar world-wide corporation.
It wasn't until the latter half of the 20^th^ century where the Church
began diversifying investments into nation-wide agriculture and media
businesses, but long before then Brigham had been running it like a
business and Jo spent so much of his time on business instead of
ecclesiastical matters that it would be hard to call him Prophet instead
of CEO most days.

Just because a business happens to run a non-profit arm, that doesn't
mean it should get away with what it does. Of course, I'm applying my
rationale to what is going on publicly with the Church right now in
coming to these conclusions, but let's play with some hypotheticals. If
a school was teaching your children that the Native Americans are
descended from Israelites and that African Americans aren't allowed in
heaven because they aren't white and delightsome, you'd pull them out
immediately and seek disaccredition from the county superintendent. If a
local bookstore required you to meet with the manager to make sure you
haven't recently masturbated before they allowed you to shop there,
you'd be in your right mind to never shop there again and call the
manager a sexual pervert on your way out of his office. If a local golf
club required you to dress up in weird clothes and swear blood oaths of
vengeance on the rival disc golf club next door whilst forcing you to do
special handshakes and passwords to get in, you'd withdraw your dues and
never look back. If a magazine subscription service required you to
cancel ALL your other memberships and said you could never read
unapproved rival magazines or else your membership would be canceled,
you'd hopefully say okay, cancel my membership and never read a word of
that magazine for the rest of your days, regardless of how useful the
information is. And, finally, if I may borrow Dan Savage's turn of
phrase: If kids got raped at Denny's as often as they get raped at
Church it would be illegal to take your kids to Denny's. If any major
company of any kind had hundreds of allegations of mental, physical, and
sex abuse and subsequent covering up of that abuse, people would lose
their fucking minds and rightfully call for the prosecution and
imprisonment of the people responsible. The company would immediately be
dissolved and the people would rightfully desire a lynching in the
streets.

No organization gets to do any of this shit without it being morally
reprehensible, ethically questionable, or straight up illegal. But,
because this one company with 16 mn customers happens to run a
non-profit arm under the guise of religion, the Mormon church does every
single one of these deplorable things, and they feel fucking attacked
when people voice opposition? The Church is a business. What's happening
with Protect LDS Children and the Joseph Bishop sex abuse revelation is
a PR nightmare for this business and to see them sic the attack dogs on
anybody speaking up about this shit and all the victim blaming is
fucking sickening.

This corporation can do whatever it wants and it has the balls to DEMAND
10% of your income?

Look, I've come a long way in the past 3.5 years of doing this podcast.
When I started this endeavor in November of 2014 I was mad. I had to
work through so many complicated emotions and the fury caused me to see
everything in red but it fueled the fire in my bosom to persevere. I've
evolved to appreciate Mormon history at a much more intellectual level
and it's easy to chart the progress of my tone and focus as I've evolved
along with the show. But when issues like the Joseph Bishop interview
and Protect LDS Children come up, it rekindles all those old emotions
lying dormant in the pit of my stomach and I want to see this goddamn
empire burned to the ground with truth just like every other ex-Mormon
who's just as infuriated as yours truly.

We've collectively let the Church get away with murder for far too long.
We can't blame the Church for using the license we've given it to abuse
its members and its own power. The Church isn't at fault for letting
things get this far, WE ARE!

The Church has illustrated time and again that they won't move until
outside pressure becomes too much to bear. My greatest fear is that the
Church is going to Teflon this issue just like every other major issue
in its past. It's never been held accountable for degrading our
humanity. The Church is a fucking parasite, defiling our best natures,
holding back progress, claiming responsibility for the best of human
advancement while at the same time washing its hands of responsibility
of its own deplorable actions. When people stand up and say, Hey, you
can't do that! The Church just reassures us that they've handled the
matter internally and they have a no tolerance policy in place, so
there's nothing to see here. FUCK THAT! When we allow a company to
police itself, abuse of power and ignoring laws happens EVERY time.

Something bears repeating here, even though I've said it multiple times
in this show. I don't take issue with Mormons. Mormons are my friends,
family, loved ones, and some of the nicest strangers I've ever met.
These problems are the product of Mormonism as a corporation, not caused
by any individual Mormon. But Mormonism is made up of Mormons. The sum
is no greater than the accrual of the constituent parts, and there's
plenty of blame to go around.

The fact of the matter is, Mormons are deeply indoctrinated to blindly
follow authority. Once the leadership has spoken, the decision has been
made. The massive edifice Mormonism has built into its indoctrination
structure instills a feeling of complete impotence in the mind of every
one of the millions of followers. But Mormons hold the power here,
Mormonism is nothing without Mormons. Every so often the Church needs to
be reminded of this inconvenient little fact. When an organization
departs from the will of its people, it's up to those people to say fuck
you, see you later, times up, we're done. Either do what we want or say
good bye to those precious membership dues and watch those emptying
gothic monoliths become liabilities instead of investments.

There are no more sacred cows. There are no more kid-gloves. This shit
has gone too far. People blindly yielding their autonomy to faceless
authority in our enlightened age is unacceptable and represents our
greatest failing as a social species. We're sitting back and watching
our fellow human be mentally, emotionally, and sexually abused every
day. How much is too much. How many children killing themselves out of
shame for having sexual desires are we willing to tolerate? How many
people being afraid of sex and intimacy is too many? How much blood will
we allow this parasite to suck from us before we pluck it off and
incinerate the little bastard? How long of granting one entity
unfettered access and unchecked power in politics is too long? .... This
shit has gone way too far....

It doesn't matter where you are on the Mormon belief spectrum. Believers
and non-believers should be equally outraged at this egregious abuse of
power. We wouldn't let any company get away with what the Church does,
but because it runs a religion, Mormon Inc. gets a pass with absolutely
no transparency or oversight.

Opposing Mormonism isn't an anti-Mormon conspiracy, it's an issue
affecting our collective humanity. It's hard to talk about this. Sex
abuse and a religion covering it up is a complex topic and it becomes
infinitely more complex when it's the religion you believe in, but these
conversations NEED to happen.

We live in during a rare time in human history where the pen is truly
mightier than the sword and the almighty dollar supersedes the strength
of any pen. It's time to make the Church hurt for abusing its power in
the only way it responds to. Anyone paying their tithing is funding the
active cover up of sexual abuse and political lobbying, and supporting
this multi-billion dollar organization deserves derision, shame, and
accosting at every level. Every Mormon swearing fealty to the Church in
a baker's cap and green apron is just as responsible as every one of us
on the outside for not saying anything in opposition to the Church. This
shit has gone too far. Enough is enough.
