---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 116 - The Tongue is an Unruly Member'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-116-tongue-unruly-member/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-116-the-tongue-is-an-unruly-member
category: History
date: 2018-08-17 03:52:22 +0000
---

JokerTrump

Ep 116 -- The Tongue is an Unruly Member

On this episode, we take a bird's eye overview of everything happening
in 1842 and spend a bit of time focusing on the immediate fallout of
Bennett's public and vitriolic departure from the Church. We review some
headlines covering the political movements of Joseph Smith's Nauvoo
Mormonism, briefly discuss his ever-expanding financial profile, and try
to assess the massive fallout and cover-up campaign crafted to keep the
practice of polygamy as acceptable for only the uppermost elites, while
publicly denying that the practice even exists. Jo and Newell K. Whitney
give some weird talks to the Relief Society about holding their tongues
and not faulting the leadership for "err\[s\] in judgement".

Links:

John C. Bennett biography\
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/john-cook-bennett>

History of the Saints\
<https://archive.org/stream/historysaints00benngoog#page/n107/mode/2up>

Bennett prior to Nauvoo\
<https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Polygamy_book/John_C._Bennett/John_C._Bennett_Prior_to_Nauvoo>

Relief Society Minutes\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-relief-society-minute-book/20#full-transcript>

Ezekiel 14\
<https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ezekiel+14&version=AKJV>

Warsaw Signal 1842\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/il/sign1842.htm>

"Joe Smith's New Peeping Stone"\
<https://www.newspapers.com/clip/22819237/the_lamoille_standard/>

Life and Contributions of Newell K. Whitney\
<https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6048&context=etd>

NaMo Home Evening\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OwyNFZeL2OE>

Zelph on the Shelf\
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBpMsj7sLzw>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Bennett wrecked it all. May of 1842 wasn't the first time Bennett had
shown some signs that he may not be the most upright kind of guy. Let's
be real for a minute, if Jo gravitated toward Bennett so much because of
similar personalities, Jo must have known at a subconscious level the
possibilities that Bennett shared some of his flaws, even if Jo never
consciously acknowledged any of his own character flaws.

Possibly as a result of this realization, possibly due to Bennett
overstepping his boundaries in one way or another, Jo sent his trusted
friend, George Miller, to investigate Bennett's history in Ohio where he
was located before moving to Illinois and attaining the office of
quartermaster-general of the Illinois militia. George Miller's report
wasn't good. More than a year before Bennett and Jo had their falling
out, Miller reported that Bennett, a claimed bachelor, had a living wife
with children.

"his poor, but confiding wife, followed him from place to place, with no
suspicion of his unfaithfulness to her; at length, however, he became so
bold in his departures, that it was evident to all around that he was a
sore offender, and his wife left him under satisfactory evidence of his
adulterous connections."

Subsequent historians, in an effort to paint him as an even more immoral
bastard, have postulated that he was removed from the Ohio Masonic
society for unruly conduct, although those claims are disputed.
Regardless, Bennett had a complicated past and it seems that Jo became
privy to some of that information as he learned more of Bennett's
practices. A mere 3 months after Jo had sent Miller to Ohio to scout
information on Bennett, Bennett had propositioned a young woman named
Catherine Fuller. Her testimony, collected in late May, 1842, when
church leaders were collecting as much dirt on Bennett as they could,
reveals how quick Bennett was in his methods of propositioning a woman
for intimacy.

"Nearly a year ago I became acquainted with John C. Bennett, after
visiting twice and on the third time he proposed unlawful intercourse
being about one week after first acquaintance. He said he wished his
desires granted. I told him it was contrary to my feelings he assured me
there was others in higher standing than I was who would conduct in that
way and there was no harm in it. He said there should be no sin upon me
if there was any sin\[,\] it should come upon himself... Bennett was the
first man that seduced me---no man ever made the attempt before him."

I want to tease apart some of the language in her testimony as it will
provide context for the rest of the documentation we're reading today.
First off, she became acquainted with Bennett and about a week later he
approached her with his proposal. Then, when Catherine rejected him
saying it was contrary to her feelings, he told her that other
higher-ups were practicing polygamy. The way it's worded specifically
alludes to husbands and wives conducting themselves in the practice of
polygamy, not just the men who were taking multiple wives. She also
added that Bennett said there was no harm in it and that if there was
any sin in it, he would take that sin upon himself. That's exactly the
same sales pitch that Jo and his mothers in Israel used to seduce other
women and those same claims appear with stunning ubiquity when it comes
to Jo's polygamous relationships. Finally, Catherine concludes with
claiming that Bennett was the first man that seduced her and that no man
had ever done so before.

The language she used leaves plenty of loopholes, namely that it sounds
legalistic and as if it only needed to be mentioned if there were
allegations to the contrary. Beyond that, it says nothing of the men
who'd propositioned her after Bennett had. Sexual predators like Bennett
and Jo can recognize similar characteristics that make easy marks,
Catherine may have been a young woman who exhibited those
characteristics. Remember Clarissa Marvel from last week, an orphan
without any friends, loneliness is one of the primary markers that
predators can easily pick up on. That's merely one of myriad markers, it
may very well be the case that Catherine Fuller was propositioned by
more Mormon elite after Bennett had done so.

What's even more likely, and this happens more than I like to admit, I'm
probably just reading too much between the lines. So, let that be a
disclaimer as we continue to read through what the history of the Church
has to say about Bennett. The reason I'm relying heavily on reading
between the lines is because how everything was recorded as the issue
played out.

Immediately it becomes clear that Jo was in full damage control mode
trying to minimize the impact of Bennett's very public and vitriolic
departure from the church. There exist discrepancies in what
testimonials were collected to smear Bennett and what his own methods
reveal in propositioning women in Nauvoo. He was using the same language
as Jo was using to acquire prospective wives, but the public statements
and affidavits were used to distance anything Jo may have been doing
from what Bennett was now rumored to be doing. There wasn't a difference
in method, just a difference in how brazen and frequent such
propositions were being made.

Let's begin dissecting the statements and see what can be gleaned.

Bennett had supporters. As soon as he "resigned" from the office of
Mayor of Nauvoo, Jo gave a revelation which was never published in the
D&C.

"Verily thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph, by the voice of
my spirit, Hiram Kimball has been insinuating evil, and forming evil
opinions against you, with others: and if he continue in them, he and
they shall be accursed, for I am the Lord thy God, and will stand by
thee and bless thee, Amen.

Which I threw across the room to Hiram Kimball, one of the councilors.
After the election, I spoke at some length concerning the evil reports
which were abroad in the city concerning myself, and the necessity of
counteracting the designs of our enemies, establishing a night watch,
and control the same."

Hiram Kimball, John C. Bennett, a small contingency of other elders and
high-ranking members of the Church and city government were not pleased
with the revelations coming to light that Jo was dishonest in his
approach. He was practicing polygamy as Bennett had been, yet in public
refused to admit it, instead choosing to make Bennett the sacrificial
lamb for Nauvoo's adulterous rumors. The way the rest of this council
meeting is recorded in the History of the Church is something to behold.
We need to understand that Bennett's departure was explosive and created
a complete meltdown of the regularly controlled propaganda outlets of
the Church.

Probably after withstanding abuse from the elders for quite some time,
Bennett stood up and made a statement, hopefully you'll be able to
recognize that this statement is likely almost completely fabricated
based on the language. Given the invocation of the name Sampson Avard in
the middle of the statement, we can infer the contents of the discussion
prior to Bennett making the statement, which we'll discuss after reading
it.

"I know what I am about, and the heads of the church know what they are
about, I expect; I have no difficulty with the heads of the church. I
publicly avow that any one who has said that I have stated that General
Joseph Smith has given me authority to hold illicit intercourse with
women is a liar in the face of God. Those who have said it are damned
liars; they are infernal liars. He neve either in public or private gave
me any such authority or license, and any person who states it is a
scoundrel and a liar. I have heard it said, that I should become a
second \[Sampson\] Avard, by withdrawing from the church, and that I was
at variance with the heads, and should use an influence against them,
because I resigned the office of Mayor. This is false, I have no
difficulty with the heads of the church, and I intend to continue with
you, and hope the time may come when I may be restored to full
confidence, fellowship, and my former standing in the church, and that
my conduct may be such as to warrant my restoration, and should the time
ever come that I may have the opportunity to test my faith, it will then
be known whether I am a traitor or a true man."

Do any of you remember who Doctor Sampson Avard was in our timeline?
You'll have to go back to episodes 49 and 50 to hear about Thomas B.
Marsh and Doctor Sampson Avard defecting from the leadership during the
Mormon war in Missouri of 1838. It was due to their affidavits that the
government was able to prove that the Danites existed and that Jo
controlled a rogue militia who'd offensively attacked Missouri
militiamen. Sampson Avard's testimony was crucial in getting Jo and the
5 other Mormon elites locked up in Liberty Jail awaiting a jury trial
for arson, robbery, and high treason. To know that they were drawing
equivocation between Avard and Bennett is very illustrative of what may
have actually been said in this high council meeting deciding what to do
with Bennett as he slowly slipped into the role of scapegoat of the
community.

His statement garnered a response from Jo:

"Will you please state definitely whether you know anything against my
character, either in public or private? General Bennett replied, I do
not, in all my intercourse with General Smith, in public and in private,
he has been strictly virtuous."

Bennett has been so maligned and written over in Mormon history that we
can't know what the exchanges actually looked like. We can be certain
that the way it's reported in the HoC is nothing like what actually
happened. The HoC is effective at writing Mormon history in a way that
is favorable to Jo, and Bennett revealed a lot of unfavorable
characteristics in Jo's conduct, thus we can't trust any of what's
written here as historically factual, we can only read it and make
assumptions based on the historical context from which this history was
initially recorded.

Jo responded to Bennett supposedly saying he'd been nothing but
virtuous.

"I then made some pertinent remarks before the council, concerning those
who had been guilty of circulating false reports, &c., and said, "Let
one twelve months see if brother Joseph is not called for, to go to
every part of the city to keep them out of their groves: and I turn the
keys upon them from this hour, if they will not repent and stop their
lyings and surmisings, let God curse them, and let their tongues cleave
to the roofs of their mouths."

Awfully defensive language for a council meeting where Bennett had done
nothing but say that Jo was the nicest and most purest of prophets in
the world, eh? This was all during the same council where Jo was
unanimously elected Mayor in place of Bennett once Bennett had resigned.
Further, after all these remarks, another power grab was made.

Jo's unpredictable wild-card brother, Crazy Willy, enjoyed a nice little
appointment.

"William Smith was elected councilor in place of Joseph Smith, elected
Mayor; George A. Smith, councilor, in place of Hugh McFall, removed from
the city."

Hugh McFall, there's basically nothing I can find about this guy, much
less what precipitated his swift removal from the city. I don't think
I'd be venturing too far out on the limb of historical speculation to
say McFall was likely removed in connection with what is happening with
Bennett and the whole spiritual wifery business. Consider what happened
here, Bennett resigned from Mayor, and Jo was immediately elected to his
position. Jo's older brother, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff, was appointed to
vice-Mayor, his younger brother, Crazy Willey, was put in Jo's vacant
place as councilor to the Mayor, and Jo's cousin, George A. Smith, was
appointed as another councilor in place of the mysteriously disappeared
Hugh McFall. Of the more than 20 elected positions of Nauvoo government,
Jo, his brothers, and his cousin, now enjoyed all the highest positions
and decision-making authority. Dissenters were removed, those who toe
the party line kept their positions, those who were most favored by the
prophet because they not only toed the party line, but helped expand the
power and reach of the prophet, were promoted to higher and higher
positions within the church and city government. Nauvoo was fast
becoming an autocracy run by the Smith family.

Please keep in mind that this is happening at the exact same time that
Pistol Packin' Porter Rockwell was in Missouri and attempted to
assassinate ex-Governor Lilburn Boggs. Boggs was the single greatest
enemy of the Church at the time, but didn't hold any real political
power, that assassination attempt was fueled more by cold-blooded
vengeance, but did have some political ramifications as Boggs was
running for Missouri state Senate, which would have been a royal pain
for Jo if he was to keep his high standing with Illinois politicians.

It wasn't just Bennett who was a serious offender requiring cleansing
from the town.

"\[May\] 24---Chauncey L. Higbee was cut off from the church, by the
High Council, for unchaste and unvirtuous conduct towards certain
females, and for teaching it was right, if kept secret, &c. He was also
put under \$200 bonds to keep the peace, on my complaint against him for
slander, before Ebenezer Robinson, Justice of the Peace."

Trusted Mormon elites were dropping like flies. Higbee here must have
been in league with Bennett at some level to merit punishment and
disfellowshipping the day before Bennett was formally excommunicated.
Apparently, the meetings during the following days were even more
hostile to Bennett where we read these passages:

"Notice was this day given to John C. Bennett, that the First
Presidency, Twelve, and Bishops had withdrawn fellowship from him, and
were about to publish him in the paper, but on his humbling himself, and
begging we would spare him from the paper, for his mother's sake, the
notice was withdrawn from the paper.

26.---This forenoon I attended a meeting of near a hundred of the
brethren in the Lodge Room, to whom John C. Bennett acknowledged his
wicked and licentious conduct towards certain females in Nauvoo, and
that he was worthy of the severest of chastisements, and cried like a
child, and begged that he might be spared, in any possible way; so deep
was his apparent sense of his guilt and unfitness for respectable
society; so deeply did he feign, or really feel contrition for the
moment, that he was forgiven still. I plead for mercy for him."

How merciful of Jo to plead mercy for Bennett when he was at the mercy
of the brethren who were threatening him with complete defamation given
his political and religious status and the severity of the accusations.

But Jo wasn't done. That afternoon he met in the public square near
Talos' temple crown to make some public declarations with hundreds in
attendance. I'm driving us toward a point here, just hang in there with
me for a bit as we continue to track Jo through May 1842.

"At 1 p.m. I attended a large and respectable meeting of the citizens of
Nauvoo, near the Temple, and addressed them on the principles of
government, at considerable length, showing that I did not intend to
vote the Whig or Democratic ticket as such, but would go for those who
would support good order, &c."

1842 was an important election year for the Mormons in Illinois. For
politicians seeking a solid voting bloc in an important area, they
needed the Mormons' support, which was gained by trading favors to Jo
Smith for their votes. Jo said it himself, he, meaning the Mormons,
would go for those who would support good order, which translates to
whoever scratches our back the best get our bloc vote.

The Warsaw signal saw how crucial this election year of 1842 was, where
Hancock county stood to get a new Governor to replace Thomas Carlin,
who'd been famously friendly to the Mormons. It was under Carlin's watch
that the Mormons were able to gain asylum in Illinois in the wake of the
Missouri-Mormon war. Here's what the Warsaw Signal reported in January
of 1842, reprinting an interesting article out of the Sangamo Journal.
The Sangamo Journal will become very important in the coming weeks.

"JO  SMITH\'S  PROCLAMATION.

As we expected, the wonderful document issued by the Prophet, directing
his followers how to vote, has created great shaking amongst the dry
bones of the politicians. On one hand, the Whigs say it is a high-handed
and insolent production, and on the other, the Democrats say umph!
scarcely knowing whether to approve or condemn. \
\
We are not prophets, but we will hazzard the prediction who tampers with
the Mormons, or condescends to sycophancy in order to insure their
support, will, in less than five years, lose more by the withdrawal of
the confidence of the people than it is now in the power of the Mormons
to give. But still, notwithstanding this is apparent, such is the
\[devotion\] with which men kneel to \[\-\-\-\-- \-\-- that\] there are
those who are willing \[to worship a\] Money-Digger as a god, if
\[\-\-\-- \-\-\-\-- they\] can secure their political
\[\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--\]. \
\
The Sangamo Journal, heretofore a friend of the Mormons, has had its
tune wonderfully changed by the proclamation. [Hear
him](http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/IL/sang1842.htm#0121) \-- \
\
\"The Proclamation which follows this preface, is in itself most strange
and daring \-- perversive of the privileges of a citizen! It would not
be so, were the signer anyone else than the person whom it represents
\-- JOSEPH SMITH. Mr. S. is supposed by his followers to be a Prophet of
the Most High God. Whether he is or not, is no matter of dispute at
present; but as such Prophet he is held in the highest veneration and
respect by his followers, whom he leads easily by the belief of his high
calling. Now, as long as Mr. Smith keeps near the sanctuary and
prophecies of religion, he is guileless of offence, but when he enters
upon the duties of a civil office of the State, and as a Lieutenant
General, speaks to his friends, whom \[as a\] PROPHET he
can command, and uses the religious influence he possesses, under the
Military garb he has acquired, he becomes a dangerous man, and must look
to the consequences. If he would take a friendly advice, we would say,
let some Joshua, the son of Nun, lead the armies, and let him stick to
interpretation and prophecy \-- and for we do assure him upon an honest
belief, that his situation in Illinois, is far more dangerous than ever
it was in Missouri; if he undertakes to take Mahomet\'s part, his only
prototype, save Mokhauna, and play the warrior and patriot \[sic
-prophet?\]. \
\
As for the Supreme Judge, who is so all powerful with the sect, let him
look to it that ambition does not overlap its mark.\" 

Hearing of Jo's declaration that they would vote only for those who
support good order in the Mormons sense must have left the anti-Mormon
party fuming, especially in the wake of so many revelations coming from
Nauvoo of sexual impropriety with Bennett's very public excommunication
and removal from office of Mayor and Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

Amidst chaos ensuing, so many other factors continued to play in which
only made issues more complex. For example, here's an article published
in the Lamoille Standard out of Vermont in January 1842.

"Joe Smith's new peeping stone.

We learn from the most indisputable authority that Joe has found a new
peeping stone, the circumstances of this discovery are rather curious,
and we give them as received. He was walking out some evenings ago with
a lady, (or a woman which ever you please,) when suddenly he darted
aside and leaped into a cellar, when he presently cried out "how com I
here?" and "how shall I get out?" The lady with this seized him and
raised him as though he had been a child. Joe then stated the miraculous
manner of his being drawn by the power of God into the cellar and to the
very spot where laid the stone, which he says has the remarkable
property of enabling him to translate unknown language, and discover the
place where treasures are hidden.

Look out for miracles soon---Joe no doubt intends to find lots of money
before long that for months have been lying by him.

Warsaw Signal"

Well, that stone must have worked because the Book of Abraham was
published 2 months later. The Nauvoo Masonic lodge was established the
same month of March 1842 and hundreds of Mormons were now filling the
ranks of Freemasons of the state of Illinois to an inordinate
proportion. The Temple ceremony was created while Pistol Packin Port was
in Missouri killing Lilburn Boggs during his campaign. A military parade
and sham battle just took place in which Jo thought his life may have
been threatened by Bennett trying to orchestrate a convenient accident
during the drill, but the power and might of the Nauvoo Legion was
nonetheless paraded through Nauvoo for all to see, Mormon and non-Mormon
alike. The endowment ceremony was also introduced in early May 1842
where men would go into the closed doors of the upper floor of the red
brick store or the recently built and dedicated Masonic lodge to perform
clandestine rites and rituals and were sworn to secrecy by threat of
death by throat-slitting and disembowelment.

Add in to everything, Jo was hopelessly in debts and didn't seem to have
much of a care for how money worked in the real world. He'd signed
contracts with insane interest rates and horrendous terms on viciously
inflated land prices due to speculation. He'd opened the Red Brick Store
and was working as a clerk some of his days while Bishop Newell K.
Whitney worked in the office in back to reconcile ledgers and collect
tithing and other donations from members to help fund the public works
projects like the Temple, canal through downtown, and the Nauvoo House
organization. Amidst all the public affairs happening in Nauvoo, the
Smith home experienced a tragedy on the part of Emma's family.

Emma had been dragged from state to state as elect lady of the prophet.
When she departed Harmony, Pennsylvania for New York in 1830, she said
good bye to her parents for the last time. She never saw them before
they died, her father, Isaac in January 1839, her mother 3 years later.

Mormon Enigma p 102

"Emma's father had died January 11, 1839. His tombstone bore the
inscription, 'The body of Isaac Hale, the hunter, like the cover of an
old book, its contents torn out and stripped of their lettering and
gilding, lies here, food for worms, yet the work itself shall not be
lost, and it will appear once more in a new and beautiful edition,
corrected and amended.' Isaac's will left the farm to his son Alva with
the stipulation that he maintain his mother 'in a kind and comfortable &
proper manner during her life.' Elizabeth Hale died three years later,
on February 16, 1842. Isaac Hale's will stipulated that, after paying
each brother twenty dollars, Alva was also to 'pay his sisters such sums
as would be right &proper.' Emma seems to be included without
discrimination on Isaac's part.

Throughout these months of sorrow Emma also took on additional
responsibilities. She and Joseph had particular interest in three of the
building projects in Nauvoo. The temple was planned for the spiritual
rejuvenation of the Saints; the anticipated Nauvoo House hotel, across
the street to the east from the old Homestead, would help provide income
and accommodations for visitors; and Joseph's red brick store, which
would be the setting for many events in Emma's life, neared completion
at the end of 1841...

In the middle of December Emma and Joseph unpacked thirteen wagonloads
of goods. The shelves bulged with a wide variety of items that tempted
the frugal citizens. Most of the supplies had been ordered by Joseph's
representatives on the East Coast and sent to the shipping head at St.
Louis. Emma had power of attorney. Joseph wrote Edward Hunter in
Pennsylvania: 'Your message is delivered to Mrs. Smith, and she will be
glad to have returns on her letter of attorney, as speedily as
circumstances will permit, according to the understanding thereof . . .
P.S. You will endeavor to have the money on your letter of attorney from
Mrs. Smith, ready to furnish a supply of goods early in the spring.'"

One wonders if the death of Emma's parents and some her resulting
inheritance was used to purchase goods for the red brick store. It's not
a crazy thought, but the finances in Nauvoo were such a muddled and
chaotic mess that it would be hard to pin that down for sure. What was
great about the red brick store is it was a way to temporarily satisfy
creditors. With supplies and commodities so scarce and of high value in
Nauvoo, the red brick store had a huge chunk of capital in the form of
goods that people wanted. When a creditor would come in and press Joseph
Smith for some money he was owed, often threatening violence if he
didn't pony up, Jo would send the gentleman on his way with a bushel of
corn or barrel of molasses from the store's inventory. This may have
satisfied the creditor momentarily, but it didn't get rid of the debts
and it quickly drove the red brick store into insolvency.

The construction projects were losing funds quickly and workers weren't
making money, or the money they made was just stocks in the Nauvoo House
project which wasn't paying anything out yet, the Mormon construction
workers can't feed their families with rag money.

From Flanders' Nauvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi p 186

"The Nauvoo House Committee was trying apparently to stir up some
enthusiasm for the hotel down on "the flat" where the pay for laborers
was less certain than in housebuilding in the Temple neighborhood up on
"the hill." "when I have had a pound of meat or a quart of meal," Smith
reported \[Lucian\] Woodworth as saying, "I have divided with the
workmen. We have had about three hundred men on the job, and some of the
best men in the world. Those that have not complained I want to continue
with me; and those that hate Mormonism and everything else that's good,
I want them to get their pay and run away as quickly as possible." Then
Smith took up the subject with a will. If stores and houses were to be
built "it will curse the place." He chastised those who speculated in
buildings on 'the hill,' and called attention to unfinished buildings
all over town 'such as grog-shops, and card-shops, and
counterfeit-shops, etc., got up ... for speculation, while the Nauvoo
House is neglected... The building of the Nauvoo House is just as sacred
in my view as the Temple. I want the Nauvoo House build. It *must* be
built. Our salvation depends on it."

All of the financial affairs were pressing too heavily on Jo and the
leadership of the Church. Jo was trustee-in-trust of the Church as well
as president, however, as was the case in Kirtland and Missouri, Jo
hadn't ever incorporated the church, everything he did was all in his
name which opened him up to every legal vulnerability thinkable. He was
honestly terrible with financial affairs. This all came to a head in
April of 1842 when the Quorum of Twelve, working under the direction of
Jo, instated a desperate program in hopes of fixing the cloud of debt
hanging over Nauvoo.... Forgiveness...

Flanders p 167

"On April 12 the Quorum of Twelve initiated a program of debt
forgiveness within the Church. Many Saints had borrowed from their
brethren over a period of years, and the Presidency and Bishopric had
done likewise to relieve the destitute from the Missouri expulsion and
build up Nauvoo. "Many of these claims have already been settled," said
the Apostles, "many have been given up as cancelled by those who held
them, and many remain unsettled." Now the Twelve urged a general
cancellation of all such claims "which have arisen out of the
difficulties and calamities of the Church... that when the Temple is
completed, there will be nothing from this source to produce jars, and
discords, strifes, and animosities, so as to prevent the blessings of
heaven descending upon us as a people... While things remain as they
are, and men remain subject to the temptations of evil as they now are,
the day of release, and year of jubilee cannot be..." How were the
Saints to prosper when the Church, the Presidency, the bishops, and
"those who have sacrificed everything but life\... for our salvation,
are thus encumbered? It cannot be." They advised that all such "old
accounts, notes, bonds, etc." be consecrated to the Temple; if they
could be negotiated, the proceeds would advance the building; if not,
after the Temple was finished, "we will make a burnt-offering of them...
which shall bind the brethren together in the bonds of eternal peace,
and love, and union... and you shall rejoice... that \[you\] have
hearkened unto counsel, and set our brethren free..."

Yep, a debt forgiveness program where the notes will be gathered into
the temple upon completion and be offered as a burnt sacrifice to set
the brethren free. That wasn't the only measure taken in 1842 to absolve
debts, because the federal bankruptcy act was passed in August 1841 and
went into effect February of 1842. When Jo learned of the possibility
that bankruptcy would absolve him of debts, or at least abate them for a
brief period, he jumped at the opportunity.

"Joseph Smith and his brothers Hyrum and Samuel declared themselves
insolvent before the county commissioner's court on April 18, 1842, and
filed petitions to be certified bankrupt by the United States District
Court for Illinois. Concurrently other leading Mormons filed similar
petitions, including President Sidney Rigdon, Bishop Vinson Knight,
"Judge" Elias Higbee, Reynolds Cahoon, Henry G. Sherwood, John P. Green,
Arthur Morrison, George Morey, Jared Carter, Amos Davis, Charles Warner,
William P. Lyon, William Niswanger, and John Fullmer. They were joined
by at least one prominent gentile businessman of Nauvoo, Hiram Kimball.

The federal bankruptcy act... provided that an inventory of assets and
creditors be provided the court, which then decided whether to grant a
decree and certificate of bankruptcy. Household and personal effects to
a value of \$300 were exempt. Smith chose to ignore the provision of the
law that no trustee-in-trust was eligible for bankruptcy.

After Smith initiated bankruptcy proceedings, he recorded few additional
details of the matter. David Kilbourne, an unfriendly neighbor of the
Saints in Montrose, claimed that the commissioner of bankruptcy for
Hancock County, a Mr. Catlin, told him that Joseph and Hyrum Smith
included seventy to eighty thousand dollars' worth of Galland's
worthless Half-Breed land scrip in their inventory of assets. John C.
Bennett, who in May 1842, broke with the Church, included in his
spectacular attack on Smith the charge that the Prophet was attempting
to use the bankruptcy law to perpetrate a huge swindle of his creditors.
Bennett claimed that when Smith was in Carthage in April to begin his
bankruptcy proceedings, he recorded in the county deed book the transfer
of a block of Nauvoo property from Smith to the Trustee-in-Trust dated
October 5, 1841. The date, said Bennett, was fictitious; no such
transfer was made until Smith decided to undertake bankruptcy."

Jo must have known there would be holdups in his bankruptcy filings
because he cooked the books a little bit to transfer property out of his
name before the filing went through. He transferred nearly 300
high-priced Nauvoo acres out of his and Emma's name to the office of
Joseph Smith as Trustee-in-Trust, showing his assets were lower than
what was really on the books.

"The declaration of insolvency was quickly and easily made, but
obtaining a court decree was, in Smith's case at least, a protracted and
ultimately futile affair... It is probable that the Prophet's private
affairs and corporate obligations were too badly mixed for the court to
untangle."

With his bankruptcy proceedings going through the court, which would
take more than 7 months before he heard back concerning the outcome, all
of these events culminate in nothing but chaos. Beyond it all, the
Bennett issue was only waxing messy.

The May 26, 1842 meeting of Relief Society is absolutely insane. They
inducted nearly 200 new members which was the largest growth since the
Society was organized a mere 2 months prior. It was standing room only
in the Masonic Lodge room where they convened. It opened up and the
president, Emma, was late. Numerous affidavits had been collected to
begin the smear campaign against Bennett's character and he was the buzz
of Nauvoo. Everything we've discussed not relating to Bennett thus far
was just the underlying tension, Bennett and spiritual wifery were the
most prominent subjects on everybody's minds. Mother Elizabeth Ann
Whitney, Jo and Emma's first close friend in Kirtland upon their
arrival, with whom they lived at multiple times for differing periods of
time, stood up and filled the empty time as Emma was arriving late by
thanking the group.

Then, Emma and Jo entered the room together, who knows what the subject
of their conversation was before entering the room. Emma didn't start
off by addressing the Relief Society, Jo instead took the stand and
started by reading Ezekiel 14. Knowing the context of Bennett and the
furious questions raging in people's minds about how pious Jo really is,
Ezekiel 14 takes on an interesting context.

"6 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God;
Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces
from all your abominations. 7 For every one of the house of Israel, or
of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from
me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the
stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet
to enquire of him concerning me; I the Lord will answer him by
myself: 8 and I will set my face against that man, and will make him a
sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people;
and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 9 And if the prophet be deceived
when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that prophet, and
I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst
of my people Israel."

If god leads the prophet astray, he'll kill him before he leads the
chosen saints astray, but Jo was still alive so he must be the true
prophet. That was his way of abating concerns that he'd fallen into
apostasy. The sermon takes a dark turn from there.

"There is another error which opens a door for the adversary to enter.
As females possess refined feelings and sensitiveness, they are also
subject to an overmuch zeal which must ever prove dangerous, and cause
them to be rigid in a religious capacity. \[You\] should be arm'd with
mercy notwithstanding the iniquity among us\... Put a double watch over
the tongue... \[You\] should chasten and reprove and keep it all in
silence, not even mention them again."

After telling the women to hold their tongues and ignore those cast out
by their own iniquity, he turned directly to Emma and said this:

"search yourselves---the tongue is an unruly member---hold your tongues
about things of no moment. A little tale will set the world on fire. At
this time the truth on the guilty should not be told openly---Strange as
this may seem, yet this is policy. We must use precaution in bringing
sinners to justice lest in exposing these heinous sins, we draw the
indignation of a gentile world upon us (and to their imagination justly,
too). It is necessary to hold an influence in the world and thus spare
ourselves an extermination."

Hold your tongues or we'll suffer extermination again. Stop the rumors
or Illinois will treat us as Missouri did. You women want to be
responsible for that? The meeting concluded after Jo's threats and
convened the next day in the grove near the temple where the 600 plus
women would be able to attend. Father Newell K. Whitney, who'd been
taught the doctrine of polygamy and was allowing Jo to court his
17-year-old daughter Sarah Ann Whitney, who would marry Jo in July of
1842, a month and a half after this meeting, took the pulpit and gave an
extremely odd speech.

"In the beginning God created man male and female and bestow'd upon man
certain blessings peculiar to a man of God of which woman partook, so
that without the female all things cannot be restor'd to the earth---it
takes all to restore the Priesthood... God has many precious things to
bestow, even to our astonishment if we are faithful. I say again I
rejoice in the prospect of what lays before. If we are striving to do
right, altho' we may err in judgment many times yet we are justified in
the sight of God if we do the best we can... It is our privilege to
stand in an attitude to get testimony for ourselves---It is as much our
privilege as that of the ancient saints... If we understand all things
we shall not be barren or unfruitful in the knowledge of God... Far be
it from me to harbor iniquity and outbreaking sins. We may have
different views of things, still there is some criterion which all may
come to, and by bringing our minds and wills into subjection to the law
of the Lord, may come to unity... I tell you, there are blessings before
to be confer'd as soon as our hearts are prepar'd to receive them."

This speech was one of those talks where the people in attendance heard
2 different talks. There were those who were not privy to the teachings
of polygamy who probably were now enticed that something will be
revealed in the future, but they can be sure that anything taught or
practiced is the will of God, even though some will occasionally err in
judgment. Then there were also those in attendance who currently had
plural relationships with Jo and other Mormon elites, they probably
heard a completely different version of that talk where Whitney was
claiming that what they're doing, even though it must remain secretive,
is approved of by God and his prophet on earth.

According to Newell and Avery in Mormon Enigma:

"Undoubtedly the speech diffused some of the consternation caused by
Emma's emphasis on virtue by assuring those women who had accepted the
principle of plurality of wives that it was yet taught, supported, and
considered a commandment by the leaders of the church. And it presaged
the coming endowment."

Outrage attrition. What we've discussed today alone covers only the
first few months of 1842. Excising Bennett and other dissenters from
religious and government authority and putting trusted family members in
the resulting vacancies while whitewashing the true motivations for
doing so; the assassination of a high-ranking government official during
his senatorial campaign by one of the highest-ranking danites in Nauvoo;
political maneuvering in an election year where the Mormons would gain a
new governor in Illinois; new scripture possibly resulting from a brand
new seer stone which came to be the Book of Abraham; a super-secretive
group of men known as the quorum of the anointed who swore death oaths
of secrecy; yet another military parade and sham battle to exhibit the
strength and force of the Nauvoo Legion for anybody who cared attend;
the red brick store being used as Jo's personal piggy bank, when the
shelves were filled with goods supplied solely by Father Newell K.
Whitney, and possibly a bit from Emma's inheritance because her last
remaining parent had just passed away; speculation concerning the Temple
and Nauvoo House hotel organization; bankruptcy proceedings pushing
their way through the state court system to hopefully relieve Jo of his
well-over one hundred thousands dollars in personal debt he was
continually defaulting on; and now all the polygamy rumors boiling over,
partly as a result of Bennett's public excommunication and removal from
office of Mayor, and Jo telling the women in Nauvoo to just hold their
tongues or their gossip will bring the ruin of Nauvoo like had happened
in Missouri; how did this guy find time to sleep?! Everything here is
outrageous to some extent for differing reasons and the Saints, friendly
and foe alike, were outraged just as much as the Gentiles outside
Nauvoo, albeit outraged for different reasons about different subjects.

The issue at hand here is that we're all people. The Mormons were all
people, Jo was just a dude, Emma just a dudette, all people have limits.
Jo and Emma had a limited number of hours in the day and finite wells of
energy from which to draw in order to deal with everything happening in
Nauvoo. The Mormons had a finite amount of outrage they could feel at
each outrageous thing coming to light. The outside world had a finite
amount of attention to devote to Jo and his wacky fanatical sect, which
allowed him and the Mormon leadership to get away with murder unchecked.

This outrage attrition cuts every way though. Jo could only do so much
in a given period of time, and people who didn't like what he was doing
only had a limited amount of time to answer the next outrage coming out
of the Nauvoo mafia family before it all but disappeared from collective
memory and the next outrage was everybody's focus. Bennett was simply
the newest and hottest outrage and people were madder than hell. But Jo
was also wearing them down, he had been for over a decade by this point
with everything he put the Mormons through. It's how people like Joseph
Smith operate. It's a war of attrition and the war is played by
constantly doing more insane stuff until people no longer recognize the
horrific things done even yesterday because they're too focused on
today's outrage. But that model of leadership isn't sustainable.
Eventually people become so exhausted that they take violent action and
Jo certainly felt their wrath a mere two years from when we currently
reside in our timeline.

It makes me wonder, what would Jo's twitter feed look like...

C:

NaMo Book club JWH almost done moving to History of the Saints.

PLDSC deep dive on GBP

Mr. Atheist guest spot

Zelph guest spot
