---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 92 - Joseph’s Myth Plus Justin Clark
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-92-josephs-myth-plus-justin-clark/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-92-josephs-myth-plus-justin-clark
category: History
date: 2018-03-01 19:41:20 PST
---

Ep 92 – Joseph’s Myth Plus Justin Clark

On this episode, we cover the evolution of the first vision accounts
spurred by an 1841 interview with Joseph’s brother, Reverend William
Smith. From the 1829 revelation included as D\&C 20 today, to the
mid-1830s, to the John Whitmer history in 1838, to the History of the
Church printed in the Times & Season in 1842, Joseph story looks less
like an actual occurrence and more like a the coming-of-age story to a
mythological figure. Was it God and Jesus who appeared, was it the angel
Nephi, did the Sacred Grove even happen? These questions and more pose
serious challenges to the claims of divine provenance of the young
prophet. After that we have on Justin Clark from the Reason Revolution
podcast to talk about the rise of the freethought movement in
19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup>-century America.

Links:

1832 First Vision Account  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/history-circa-summer-1832/1#full-transcript>

1835/6 First Vision Account  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-1835-1836/24>

1841/2 First Vision Account  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/history-circa-june-1839-circa-1841-draft-2/2>

Several Remarkable Visions Orson Pratt  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/appendix-orson-pratt-an-interesting-account-of-several-remarkable-visions-1840/3#full-transcript>

MormonThink First Vision Essay  
<http://www.mormonthink.com/firstvisionweb.htm>

MormonThink Nephi or Moroni Essay  
<http://www.mormonthink.com/nephiweb.htm>

LDS First Vision Essay  
<https://www.lds.org/topics/first-vision-accounts?lang=eng>

John Whitmer History Introduction  
<http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#historical-intro>

1841 William Smith Interview p.410  
<https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015004820760;view=1up;seq=425>

Interviews:

Reason Revolution with Justin Clark  
<http://reasonrevolution.org/episode-36-the-interview-bryce-blankenagel/>

We Talk About Dead People Sidney Rigdon  
<https://www.stitcher.com/podcast/aaron-carter/we-talk-about-dead-people>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Deluded fanatics, religious imposters, ignorant knaves, and wretches of
the adversary. In spite of their endless efforts to be taken seriously,
the religious society of the 1830s and 40s considered the Mormons to be
a nuisance at best and fanaticism hell-bent on the subjugation of the
American people at worst.

The truth of the matter is, from the Florida Keys to the Great Lakes and
west to the Mississippi, the popular press had been following the
Mormons with some fascination and loads of skepticism since its
inception and meteoric uprising in Ohio. The conflict in Missouri had
only spurred the uprising of hundreds more publications showing the
Mormons in less-than-favorable light.

The joy historians have today with how new the Mormon religion is and
how documentable its uprising is compared to other religions is a joy
which journalists shared when the religion was truly in its infancy. The
hundreds of indexable newspaper articles we have today had to be
collected and printed by people who took fascination in the tides and
forces of public movements like Mormonism, and it’s thanks to those
valiant journalists that we know so much of Mormonism from sources other
than church chroniclers and propagandists.

It’s to be expected though, this widespread public fascination with
Mormonism. They weren’t just a Christian sect with their own
interpretation or translation of the Bible, they were claiming to have
new scripture which comprised a third testament of Jesus to the Native
American peoples. If it was to be believed by the wider populous that
Joseph was a true prophet, he needed an incredibly miraculous story to
sell his divine provenance.

We’re going to spend the historical portion of today’s episode walking
through something a lot of Mormons have trouble with when they begin
studying Mormon history. In episodes 32 and 33 we spent a bit of time
talking about the versions of the first-vision story and we’ve touched
on the topic a few times throughout the 3.5 years we’ve been doing this,
but let’s take a step back and examine the context from which these
first-vision accounts arose. This is particularly relevant to our
timeline in 1841 and I’ll illustrate why by the end of the history
segment today.

The earliest account we have of the first vision is found nestled in
Oliver Cowdery’s revelation included in today’s D\&C as section 20. This
was likely recorded in the Summer of 1829 or possibly right after the
Church was created in April 1830, but wasn’t published until 1833 as
Chapter 24 of the Book of Commandments. In BoC 24, it tells of Joseph’s
heavenly manifestation as such after naming him an elder of the Church
alongside Cowdung Allover Cowdery:

“6 For, after that it truly was manifested unto this first elder, that
he had received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the
vanities of the world;

7 But after truly repenting, God ministered unto him by an holy angel,
whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and
white above all whiteness, and gave unto him commandments which inspired
him from on high, and gave unto him power, by the means which were
before prepared, that he should translate a book;

8 Which book contained a record of a fallen people, and also the fulness
of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles; 

9 And also to the Jews, proving unto them, that the holy scriptures are
true;”

No dating on this holy angel manifestation, no appearance of God and
Jesus, no reading of the bible in James 1:5, no telling Joseph that all
the religions are led astray and their professors corrupt, no Sacred
Grove, no appearance of the Gold Plates, just a book, nothing all that
remarkable which would set Joseph above any of his religious
contemporaries.

Possibly in 1832, Joseph penned his own account and this is the only
account of the first vision experience from Joseph Smith, every other
version before and after this claimed 1832 version were dictated to a
scribe or were recalled from hearing Joseph preach his history to
prospective members. This supposed 1832 version had a fair amount added
to it by Frederick G. Williams in his handwriting, but we’ll only focus
on what Joseph himself wrote of the visionary account. The reason I keep
saying possibly 1832 and claimed 1832 is because there is no actual
dating on this account and Mormon historians know that Frederick G.
Williams became Jo’s scribe in Feb or March 1832 and they basically
surmise that one of his first tasks was helping Jo to create this
history. It may be later than 1832, but it’s definitely not older. The
Joseph Smith Papers has narrowed this account to July of 1832 when
Hingepin Sidney Rigdon was in error and led astray, they don’t discuss a
possible causal link between Rigdon preaching against Joseph’s divinity
and the crucial timing of this history being penned but I think we can
draw correlations to the point of some causation in this instance.

His supposed 1832 account reads in part: this was a grief to my Soul
thus from the age of twelve years to fifteen I pondered many things in
my heart concerning the sittuation of the world of mankind the
contentions and divi\[si\]ons the wicke\[d\]ness and abominations and
the darkness which pervaded the of the minds of mankind my mind
become excedingly distressed for I become convicted of my sins and by
searching the scriptures I found that mand \<mankind\> did not come unto
the Lord but that they had apostatised from the true and liveing faith
and there was no society or denomination that built upon the gospel of
Jesus Christ as recorded in the new testament…therefore I cried unto the
Lord for mercy for there was none else to whom I could go and to obtain
mercy and the Lord heard my cry in the wilderness and while
in \<the\> attitude of calling upon the Lord \<Here Freddy Willey
added ‘in the 16th year of my age’\> a piller of fire light above the
brightness of the sun at noon day come down from above and rested upon
me and I was filled with the spirit of god and the \<Lord\> opened the
heavens upon me and I saw the Lord and he spake unto me
saying Joseph \<my son\> thy sins are forgiven thee. go
thy \<way\> walk in my statutes and keep my commandments behold I am
the Lord of glory I was crucifyed for the world that all those who
believe on my name may have Eternal life \<behold\> the world lieth in
sin and at this time and none doeth good no not one they have turned
asside from the gospel and keep not \<my\> commandments…

Then it switches again to Freddy Willey to tell of the bedside
appearance of the unnamed angel.

and it came to pass when I was seventeen years of age I called
again upon the Lord and he shewed unto me a heavenly vision for behold
an angel of the Lord

 came and stood before me and it was by night and he called me by name
and he said the Lord had forgiven me my sins and he revealed unto me
that in the Town of
[Manchester](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/history-circa-summer-1832/1#3815247116699223328) Ontario
County N.Y. there was plates of gold upon which there was
engravings which was engraven by Maroni & his fathers the servants of
the living God in ancient days and deposited by th\[e\] commandments of
God and kept by the power thereof”

This is the earliest full account we have of Jo’s history and the only
which is from his own hand. This was written 10 years after the claimed
occurrence and was never actually published. However, this 1832 account
is rather important for shaping how Mormon missionaries approached
investigators in the early 1830s. Prior to this they only had vague
references of the history of the Gold plates coming into Joseph’s
possession after an angelic manifestation. This 1832 account essentially
codified the story and provided a place where elders and missionaries
could fall back on when preaching of Jo’s divinity.

The next accounts come out of 1835 and 36. They don’t differ all that
substantially from the 1832 account except for pushing the date to
slightly earlier around 1820-21 and changing the earliest manifestation
where Jo had previously claimed to see the heavens open and witness god,
these 35 and 36 accounts changed that to angels and then to God the
father appearing in the sacred grove, and also changed the setting to
the woods instead of the bedside manifestation.

These subsequent accounts were each given at times when there was strife
existing in the ranks of trusted Mormon elites. The 1832 account came
along when Rigdon was claiming Jo was in apostasy and had lost the keys.
These accounts came in the wake of the Zion’s camp debacle and amidst
the uprising and popularization of the Spalding theory with the
widespread distribution and consumption of Mormonism Unvailed by Eber
Howe. Each time one of these social pressures caused people to question
Jo’s divinity, another version of the first visions would come forth,
each time becoming more grandiose and miraculous.

Finally, the Mormons were chased from Ohio and resettled in Missouri
where there was already a significant chapter of Mormons who’d been
living there since around 1832. It was during this time in 1838 that
Joseph decided he needed a canonical account of his first vision
experience to pass to his followers and progenitors. Beginning in 1838,
Jo began dictating his personal history to multiple scribes.

When Jo and Rigdon first made their way to Missouri in early 1838, they
purged the Missouri leadership and removed a number of people who were
thought to be in error, including D-Day David Whitmer, Ollie Cowdung,
and most importantly, John Goebbels Whitmer. This is important because
John Whitmer had been given the esteemed office of first official church
historian. He’d compiled notes from the previous 7 years from when he
was initially given the job in 1831, and started copying them into his
single history notebook. But, when John Goebbels Whitmer was
excommunicated, Jo and the leadership knew that they would no longer
have access to his notes on early church history, thus a new history of
the church needed to be composed.

Jo began the dictation of his history in early 1838 in response to
loosing this powerful resource from John Whitmer. However, 1838 was a
bit chaotic for the Mormons, as was 1839 during their exodus from
Missouri to Illinois, so the project was put on hold for a brief time.

Once the Mormons had settled in Illinois, the project was picked back up
with John Corrill and Elias Higbee as official Church historians, while
Willard Richards, Joseph Smith, and Hingepin Rigdon all worked together
to compile the history which they had documentation of, but many
mysteries still existed. Beginning in mid-1840, this group of historians
and editors fervently conducted their efforts in earnest to push out a
systematized and streamlined history of the Church which people could
use when telling the history of the Gold Bible, Joseph Smith, and the
Saints to those who inquired after such information.

However, the original history of the Church from John Goebbels Whitmer
was an important resource in the hands of an apostate, Jo and Rigdon
wanted it for a couple reasons. If they could have Whitmer’s history, it
may shed some useful light on details they didn’t have, had forgotten,
or didn’t have documentation of. Whitmer’s history was an invaluable
resource for what it contained, and that’s a tough commodity to let go
of. It’s even tougher to leave that commodity in the hands of someone
who’d been excommunicated from the church.

Back in 1838, Jo and Rigdon wrote to the excommunicated Whitmer in hopes
of getting the history from him.

From JosephSmithPapers.org on their historical introduction of the
Whitmer History:

“After his estrangement from the
church, [Whitmer](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#13503291042901833826) refused
to relinquish the manuscript for printing. Two months after Whitmer’s
excommunication, JS and [Sidney
Rigdon](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#689327121886053345) wrote
him:

‘We were desireous of honouring you by giving publicity to your notes on
the history of the Church of Latter day Saints, after such corrections
as we thaught would be necessary; knowing your incompetency as a
historian, and that your writings coming from your pen, could not be put
to the press, without our correcting them, or elce the Church must
suffer reproach; Indeed Sir, we never supposed you capable of writing a
history; but were willing to let it come out under your name
notwithstanding it would realy not be yours but ours. We are still
willing to honour you, if you can be made to know your own interest and
give up your notes, so that they can be corrected, and made fit for the
press. But if not, we have all the materials for another, which we shall
commence this week to write\[.\]’

There is no record
of [Whitmer](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#16889644428765112807) responding
to the condescending letter, and church leaders soon made other
arrangements. [John
Corrill](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#2181780909601146759) and [Elias
Higbee](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#10783652699441000424)
had already been assigned as historians, and within three weeks of
writing to Whitmer, JS himself began to prepare a new history with the
assistance of [Sidney
Rigdon](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#1717086839573120468) and
scribe [George W.
Robinson](http://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/john-whitmer-history-1831-circa-1847/1#4877875304858208179).”

These men would share a similar letter exchange in the future concerning
the Whitmer history, but ol’ John Goebbels never coughed up the goods.
Whitmer’s history of the Church remained in RLDS archives until Dean
Jessee and later the Joseph Smith Papers project were granted access to
copy and publish it online.

Now we have to be careful when referring to the history of the Church as
an actual history. Never forget, history is written by the victor and
the history of the Church was compiled at a time when dissent and
persecution were at the greatest levels ever experienced by anyone in
the church prior to this time. But people were constantly asking and
small articles were being published in Chicago and England telling the
history of Mormonism the way the Mormon elite wanted it to be told.

While on his mission in Europe in 1840, Orson Brain-Powered Pratt
published a little booklet titled Interesting Account of Several
Remarkable Visions which included a copy of Joseph’s history the way it
would be printed in the Times & Seasons beginning in 1842. This shows us
that even though the Joseph Smith history we know wasn’t published until
1842, they were working on it and had functional drafts to publish in
other outlets like Orson Pratt’s booklet. Think of it as an official
statement release from the Church in the early 1840s that members,
non-members, and media outlets could use in any format they wished.

All of this discussion about the various versions of Joseph’s history
surrounding the first visions leads us to what happened in early 1841,
an interview. This interview we’re about to read through is why we’ve
spent so much time talking about the progression of versions of the
first vision and why this subject was particularly relevant in 1841 and
is just as relevant to us as we’re progressing through 1841. This was a
public statement issued by Joseph’s younger brother, Crazy William
Smith, and was given aboard a steam-boat on the Ohio river. Here’s a few
relevant excerpts from the interview, which I’m reading from Francis
Kirkham’s A New Witness for Christ in America v.2 2<sup>nd</sup> edition
published 1967:

“\[The statements\] present briefly one of the most remarkable
exhibitions of the obliquities and follies of the human mind in its
religious speculations which the history of this age records.

Joseph Smith, now 35 years of age, is the eldest of five brothers, all
born at Norwich, in the state of Vermont… In the year 1816 or 1817, the
whole family removed to the state of New York, and lived sometimes in
Palmyra, and sometimes in the adjacent town of Manchester. They were in
rather low circumstances, and followed farming. About the year 1823,
there was a revival of religion in that region, and Joseph was one of
several hopeful converts. The others were joining, some one church, and
some another, in that vicinity, but Joseph hesitated between the
different denominations. While his mind was perplexed with this subject
he prayed for divine direction, and afterwards was awaked one night by
an extraordinary vision. The glory of the Lord filled the chamber with a
dazzling light, and a glorious angel appeared to him and told him that
he was a chosen vessel of the Lord to make known true religion. The next
day he went into the field, but was unable to work, his mind being
oppressed by the remembrance of the vision. He returned to the house,
and soon after sent for his father and brothers from the field; and
then, in the presence of the family—my informant one of them—he related
all that had occurred. They were astounded, but not altogether
incredulous. After this, he had other similar visions, in one of which
the existence of certain metallic plates was revealed to him, and their
location described—about three miles off, in a pasture ground. The next
day he went alone to the spot, and by digging discovered the plates of a
sort of rude stone box. They were eight or ten inches long, less in
width about the thickness of panes of glass, and together made a pile of
about five or six inches high. They were in a good state of
preservation, had the appearance of gold, and bore inscriptions in
strange characters on both sides. He brought them home, but was unable
to read them.

(Comment on William’s ability to remember the plates with so much
detail, but didn’t seem to include the ever-important detail of Jo
telling him about the Sacred Grove experience when he saw God and Jesus
in human form.)

He afterwards made a facsimile of some parts of the inscription, and
sent it to professor Anthon of New-York city. The professor pronounced
the characters to be ancient Hebrew corrupted, and the language to be
degenerate Hebrew, with a mixture of Egyptian. He could decipher only
one entire word. After this, Joseph Smith was supernaturally assisted to
read and to understand the inscription; and he was directed to translate
a great part of it. The pages which he was not to translate were found
to be sealed together, so that he did not even read them and learn their
contents. With an assistant to correct his English, he translated so
much of the transcription as now makes the Book of Mormon. He kept the
plates a long time in his chamber, and after translating from them, he
repeatedly showed them to his parents and to other friends. But my
informant said he had never seen them. At length he was directed to bury
the plates again in the same manner—which he accordingly did.

The Book of Mormon is Mr. Smith’s professed translation of the
inscription on the plates; and it bears the name of Mormon, because a
Jewish Christian of the 4<sup>th</sup> century, bearing the name Mormon,
is the alledged\[sic\] author of the inscription…. (goes on to tell
basic plotline of BoM)

Mr. Smith, with no great difficultly, persuaded his parents, his four
brothers, and a few others, to acknowledge his prophetic character, and
to embrace his views; but from the mass of the people he met with
ridicule and opposition. At the end of three or four years he could
number only a hundred followers. Afterwards he was more successful; and
now—A.D. 1841—he has perhaps 15,000 adherents. A large body of them
reside at Nauvoo, in the state of Illinois, where Mr. Smith himself
lives and has fixed the center and capital of the sect. The rest are
scattered over the United States, and in Europe. Three heads of the sect
are now laboring in England, Scotland, and Ireland, where they meet with
much success.”

Once again, no mention of the sacred grove with God and Jesus appearing
to Joseph. This is his younger brother giving the interview in 1841 when
the story of God and Jesus in the Sacred Grove had been circulated to a
few individuals and printed in the Chicago Tribune. How did his own
brother, who witnessed these powerful times in the 1820s just forget
that detail about his brother’s story? He was there\! He saw Jo’s legs
refuse their faculty and collapse in the front yard of their home. He
saw the plates and left an incredibly detailed description of their
size. He saw Jo disappear into the woods 2-4 times throughout 1823-27
and come back with unbelievable stories of his great trials with the
spirit whose charge was guarding the sacred gold plates. William Smith
is one of the few contemporary accounts who could provide details of
Jo’s story pre-1830 and at this crucial time when the History of the
Church was being compiled to be published in the Times & Seasons,
William couldn’t relay the details of Jo’s theophany in the Sacred
Grove.

Look, if you have kids and you come into the kitchen only to find the
cookie jar with the lid off and 6 cookies missing, if that kid thinks
they are in trouble, chances are they’re going to lie. It was their
infant sibling who took the cookies, it was the cat, it was their
favorite super hero on Paw Patrol, or, maybe the more inventive of the
kids out there will say it was their imaginary friend who snuck in and
took the cookies. Some of the more audacious children out there may go
as far as providing an explanation instead of blame shifting, maybe that
imaginary friend wanted the kid to have a cookie and told them to steal
the cookies. People, kids especially, are going to lie when it serves
their best interest. Many people don’t lie when they’re in trouble or
when doing so would be better for them, but society doesn’t tend to
favor those kinds of people in the short term because facts don’t
matter.

But Joseph’s story matters\! The first thing those nice young men and
women will tell you when you ask what the Book of Mormon is will
inevitably come to the story of a young man who went out in the woods
and prayed to God to ask which of all the religions was true. After
struggling with the adversary, God answered by appearing with his son,
Jesus, in a pillar of light over this 14-year-old’s head to tell him
that all the religions are false and that he would restore the one true
religion to the continent in the latter days. The angel Moroni appeared
to Joseph in his room one September night 3 years later and gave him
instructions of where to find gold plates which contained the history of
an ancient people on the American continent and 4 years later he
attained the plates. This story is a fabrication published 22 years
after the actual incident. The ability we have to chart the progression
of Jo’s theophany to becoming a legendary tale of Joseph Smith being
actually visited by God and Jesus in the woods and the appearance of an
angel to being the angel Moroni appearing to Moroni delivering the
plates and taking them back when finished and being seen as an old man
walking on the side of the road by Jo and friends. All of the points we
plot from the original draft of the story in 1829 to 1832 to 1835 and 36
and then now the 1842 version which is broadly used as the standard
narrative, each of these points demonstrate the evolution of a legend.
It all never happened.

Objections can be raised, like the fact that the angel was reported as
the angel Moroni as early as 1831 in an affidavit in Mormonism Unvailed,
but was changed to the angel Nephi when it was published in the 1842
edition of the Times and Seasons, the 1851 edition of the Pearl of Great
Price, and even in the memoir of Lucy Mack Smith, they all report the
angel as Nephi, but it was changed again to Moroni in the 1852 HoC
printed in the Deseret News. That’s tantamount to Lucas saying Han
Solo’s father is Mace Windu who cut off Solo’s legs at the mouth of a
volcano. More objections can be provided in that some Mormon historians
have document more than 55 occurrences of an angel meeting with Jo from
1823-1831, as if a person hallucinating something dozens of times
instead of 4 times makes the hallucination more plausible.

But those are just incidental objections to the story, the main problem
is that it’s obviously a fabrication. It’s made up\! Each time something
would come up in Mormon history where Jo needed a larger and more
grandiose story to make his claim to divine provenance more unique, the
story evolved. Jo’s genesis story as prophet was just as important to
people in the 1840s as it is to Mormonism today and Jo recognized that.

Just picture how this all came about though.

So, Brother Joseph, tell us again about how you got the gold plates.

Well, brother, I’m glad you asked. My soul was racked with that great
question, which of all religions is true. An angel appeared to me while
I was supplicating by my bedside and he told me the lord would deliver
an ancient record of the early inhabitants of this continent. Finally,
after years of instruction, the angel directed me to the place where the
record was buried with the seer stones which helped me to translate the
inscriptions into the Book of Mormon.

Who was this angel who appeared to you?

It was the same Nephi who wrote the first books.

Why would it be Nephi, wasn’t Moroni the prophet who buried the abridged
Gold Plates in hill Cumorah?

Well Nephi appeared to me, but it was the angel Moroni who directed me
to their resting place.

How do we know this was a good spirit which appeared to you?

Because God appeared to me and assured me it was an angel of the Lord.

Wait, what? God appeared to you? When?  
  
Yes God appeared to me, it was a couple years before the angel appeared.

Was it Jesus or God?

Both.

Both?

Yes, both God and Jesus appeared to me before the angel did and told me
that I would start the one true religion.

But brother Joseph, I thought you were caught up in the sin and failings
of life at the time, how do we know it was actually God and Jesus and
not familiar spirits?

Well, when God appeared to me he told me my sins were forgiven.

You mean God and Jesus, right?

Yes, of course, just like I said earlier, God and Jesus appeared and
told me my sins were forgiven and that all religions are evil and their
professors corrupt.

Did you tell anybody of this when it happened?

Well, I told my family, but nobody would believe me then so I waited
until now to tell all of you about it…

Hmmm…. Seems legit… Pass the pipe, you’re totally babysitting.

Long-time listeners will know that we’ve talked about the first-vision
accounts and the historical issues with them in the past. But it’s worth
rehashing at this time when the Mormons were doing everything possible
in Nauvoo to be seen as a legitimate religious movement and this very
story was one of the main points the missionaries and elites used to
sell the prophet to those who were skeptical.

However, we have to put ourselves in the mindset of these people at the
time when the stories were told. Likely, none of the people hearing Jo’s
story in the 1840s were aware of his 1832 account which was unpublished
at the time. Most of them had probably never heard about the 1835 or 36
version but only had the section from D\&C by Oliver Cowdery to fall
back on. Jo expanding on the details of the D\&C version seems
acceptable when we don’t have all the other versions with which to
compare to chart the progression of the story.

But the story MATTERS\! If the very story you use to sell the prophet’s
divinity is a fabrication, how can the religion itself not be a
fabrication? The answer seems rather clear to yours truly, because it is
a fabrication. Mormonism may be a world religion with 16 million claimed
adherents today and 10s of thousands of salesmen pushing the product on
the unwashed masses, mostly to third-world countries without internet
access lately, but it was made up. I pity the person who’s stuck with
the burden of proof that Joseph was a legitimate prophet of gods. That’s
something which is much harder to prove today than it was during Jo’s
life.

What was a prophet to these 19<sup>th</sup>-century Christians? A person
who speaks for God. A person who gives divine revelations, predicts the
future, and leads people as the prophets of old. Jo claimed to be all of
those things and when challenged he would just pile a lie on top of
another lie because facts didn’t matter then and they apparently don’t
matter now. But we can check this stuff now. We can use information from
the church itself to prove Jo was lying at some level. Maybe lying is
too inflammatory a word to use, maybe a better interpretation would be
misremembering. But that means that a person who supposedly had an open
conduit to gods somehow couldn’t remember the most important moment of
his life at least when it came to the details of the angel’s name, the
time it happened, whether it was an angel or god or gods in the Sacred
Grove, you know, just minor details that one usually forgets. This isn’t
what Jo had for breakfast or the name of a person who’d hired him 10
years ago, this is GOD giving you the most important mission of your
life, nay giving you the entire purpose of your life, how the hell does
somebody just misremember that?\! A representative for God, you would
think, should be an honest person, but I’ve yet to find a single example
in Jo’s life where he was stalwart, honest, and forthcoming in his
dealings with his fellow men. Instead we have a career of chaos
punctuated by 42 arrests or court hearings, and the only constant was
Jo’s ability to lie on the spot to serve his needs at that given
moment. Seeing these later progressions and developments of Jo’s
theology put into proper context paints a picture of somebody not
constrained by truth or the morality of his time, but that’s merely my
deduction from seeing the crime scene of Mormon history laid out in
front of me. We must never forget who Jo really was.

Reason Revolution Ep 36 Origins of Mormonism, Utah Mormon culture,
secular Mormonism, the power of storytelling

We Talk About Dead People Special Episode after 28 talking about Sidney
Rigdon
