---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 84 - CC Polygamy Pt7 Roy Jeffs Pt2 Thomas Monson Death
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-84-cc-polygamy-pt7-roy-jeffs-pt2-thomas-monson-death/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-84-cc-polygamy-pt7-roy-jeffs-pt2-thomas-monson-death
libsyn_embed: 6117400
redirect_from: /2018/01/05/ep-84-cc-polygamy-pt7-roy-jeffs-pt2-thomas-monson-death/

category: History
date: 2018-01-04 19:07:44 PST
---

1/4/18

Ep 84 – CC Polygamy Pt7 Roy Jeffs Pt2 Thomas Monson Death

On this episode, we get into part 2 of the interview with Warren Jeffs’s
son, Roy, and hear about his transition out of the FLDS and how he’s
doing today a few years after leaving. After that I recount a bit of my
journey to Short Creek over the holiday season and discuss the death of
the Mormon Prophet, Thomas S. Monson. Maybe we can draw some conclusions
contrasting the two versions of Mormon Prophets.

Links:

Roy Jeffs Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/roy.jeffs.12>

Monson Articles  
<https://mobile.nytimes.com/2018/01/03/obituaries/thomas-monson-dies.html?referer=https%3A%2F%2Ft.co%2FNKEHpAXzb1%3Famp%3D1#click=https://t.co/NKEHpAXzb1>  
<https://www.mormonnewsroom.org/article/president-thomas-monson-passes-away?__prclt=7UJaQmxB>  
<https://www.lds.org/churchhistory/presidents/controllers/potcController.jsp?leader=16&topic=facts>

ExMormon Subreddit Presidential Succession Timeline  
<https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/7nwmji/timeline_for_nelson_becoming_prophet_the_details/>

Donald Trump on Orrin Hatch  
<http://www.cnn.com/2018/01/02/politics/orrin-hatch-retires/index.html>

Show Links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Let’s jump right in to part 2 of the Roy Jeffs interview.

That concludes our interview with Roy Jeffs. I want to thank him again
for coming on to the show and sharing his unique experience with all of
us and speaking so candidly about his personal history.

I want to take a few minutes to discuss some thoughts that have cropped
up in the last 24 hours. I had this episode planned and scripted out,
but lo and behold, my social media blew up yesterday about Thomas S.
Monson passing away and now I’m left with a decision of whether to date
this episode by talking about a news headline and scrap the entire
script I had planned, or to go with the original plan and essentially
ignore this prominent story making waves all over my social media and
news aggregators. I’ve decided to go with the former and use it as a
jump off point to discuss Mormon prophets.

I don’t know what I can say about Monson that hasn’t already been said
by numerous news outlets and op-ed pieces written already. I don’t
harbor any condemnations of Monson that I don’t harbor against the
church at large and I won’t be dancing on his grave the way I did when
Boyd K. Packer passed away when this podcast was in it’s infancy.

Thomas Monson was a product of his system. His first job after getting
his degree in business management was with the Deseret News, the
church’s primary propaganda arm masquerading as a news agency. He was
cultivated and pigeonholed to be in church leadership from a young age
and he’s been running in blessed circles his entire life. He’s never
suffered any significant financial hardships, never been in danger of
not being able to put food on the table, never had to worry about a
medical bill going unpaid, and always had friends in high places to
ensure his success. Thomas Monson led a charmed Mormon life.

Let’s take a step back, Monson was born in August 1927. Right there is
something worth taking note of. His parents were born at the turn of the
20<sup>th</sup> century. His earliest childhood was spent during the
great depression and he was coming of age at the tail end of the
greatest generation into the silent generation, or the lucky few. He was
barely old enough to serve in World War II, but only had a brief stint
with the Naval reserve and remained stateside for his entire tour from
45-46. He got his bachelor’s degree in marketing in 1948 and later
gained his master of Business Administration from BYU in 1974. These are
all markers of a perfect candidate to become an apostle especially
because his first job was in printing at the age of 12 which he
continued after his education by becoming an advertising executive and
later general manager of the Deseret News Press in the 1960s. From all I
can tell, Monson has never taken a paycheck from a company which wasn’t
affiliated with the church, every single dollar he’s made in his life
has been somehow connected with the church with the tiny exception of
his naval reserve service for barely over a year. He won Slate.com’s
most powerful man over 80 in 2009 and 2010 and built the City Creek
Center multi-billion dollar shopping mall which has been a cash-cow for
the church since he cut the ribbon in 2012 with those famous words:
“Let’s go shopping\!”

You can watch a movie made about him from a few years back which tells a
number of faith promoting stories, just search for Thomas S. Monson on
Youtube and it tells of his early church service from being a bishop of
a widow’s ward in the 50s and becoming a Mission President in Canada
into the early 60s. He was finally inducted into the quorum of the
Twelve in 1963 at the age of 36, and you can hear his voice in the intro
to this show saying “I pledge my life, all that I may have; I will
strive to the utmost of my ability, to be what you would want me to be;”
given during his induction speech.

What does his legacy leave us? He was an apostle during the uprising of
new Mormon history which was sort of kicked off with Fawn Brodie in the
mid-1940s but really came to fruition in the 70s and 80s. He was an
apostle when the church lifted the priesthood ban in the late 70s under
prophet Spencer W. Kimball. He’s been a counselor in the first
presidency since 1985 under Ezra Taft Benson, Howard Hunter and Gordon
B. Hinckley and finally in 2008 he took the mantle as prophet seer and
revelator of the LDS church and president of the corporation of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the office he served in
until January of 2018. For the past year or so, Monson has been rather
ill with some form of dementia. People in and out of the church have
known for a long time now that this day was coming and now that we’re
here a very smooth transition will take place to put Russell M. Nelson
in the office of Prophet and President at the age of 93.

There are many ways to approach Monson’s legacy. In some ways, the
church is more progressive now than it has ever been before which all
happened with Monson as apostle or prophet. The church is significantly
more transparent with its history than it was even in 2007 under Gordon
B. Hinckley. Monson oversaw the publishing of the church essays which
have shed much needed light on the church’s official stance with
complicated issues lurking in its history. The Joseph Smith Papers
project has made more church history records publicly available on the
internet than ever before and historians now have greater access to
documents in the church history library than they have in the past. I
can heap accolades onto Monson and the church about their history in the
past half-decade under Monson’s presidency for hours when we compare it
to how they’ve approached Mormon history before his leadership. But
that’s enough condoning, because we can’t lose sight of the church’s
actions which deserve condemnation.

During this recent renaissance in church history, the Mormon church has
also been more politically active than it ever has in its history prior
to the 2000s. Prop 8 happened at the very beginning of Monson’s
administration, and every amicus brief, every lobbying effort, every
5-star dinner held between a public official and a member of the Q15;
every single political move the church has made in the past decade has
all been under Monson’s watch and leadership. They’ve spent hundreds of
millions of dollars to exert their political will in concert with every
other conservative religious organization out there, in spite of what
the progressive populace has seen as morally good. They’ve thrown their
horse into the race with the Obergefell decision, with the transgender
bathroom bills in southern states, with the Gay wedding cake fiasco out
of Colorado and those are just the issues the public is aware of,
there’s no way to understand where the church has thrown its lobbying
and political efforts in every case or law in which they’ve had some
vested interest.

The church experienced a leak in November of 2015 which made clear their
stance on gay couples who were members of the church. They subsequently
published a statement to be read in various congregations which said
that children of gay couples couldn’t be members of the church until
they were adults. The Evergreen organization operated under Monson’s
leadership as apostle and prophet which used gay conversion therapy
methods including shock-therapy, pummeling an effigy of one’s mother,
undressing in front of other men, and re-enacting childhood trauma to
try and turn people not gay. This hateful and bigoted anti-science
organization merged with another larger gay-conversion therapy center in
2014 named North Star which it still operates under to this day holding
quarterly firesides in Utah. The teen suicide rate in Utah has increased
by 141% in the past 6 years and it was already twice the national
average to begin with. Gay teen homeless rates in Utah are nearly double
the national average.

Under Monson’s leadership, Bloomberg published their landmark 2013
article, How the Mormons make their money, which had a team of
economists estimate the LDS church’s wealth. They estimated a hefty sum
of $7bn in non-taxable tithing income every year, listed over 100
for-profit insurance, ranching, and media companies under the church’s
control and made the summary estimation of the church’s total wealth to
be somewhere between $40-50bn. An international company with untold
political power and multiple propaganda arms, boasting current
membership numbers of 16 million people, all completely free of
government oversight because of their status as a religious
organization, all controlled by Thomas Spencer Monson and 14 other
obscenely wealthy white male Americans.

The New York Times published a great article about the life and legacy
of Monson and included in it is a picture of Thomas Monson and
ex-president George W. Bush shaking hands in a very familiar way for
those of you who’ve gone through the temple ceremonies. This happened
right after Monson took the presidency.

Now we fast-forward from what’s left behind by Monson and focus on what
has been happening the last few months and what will happen in the
months to come as polygamist Russel M. Nelson takes the office of
president.

Recently President Donald Trump made a visit to Utah, during which time
he was surrounded by a number of the Q15. He also met with Senator Orrin
Hatch and removed Obama era restrictions on two national monuments in
Utah. Nobody really knows what else was discussed. Last week, Orrin
Hatch announced he will not be running for his senatorial seat again
this year, marking the end of his more than 40 years in Utah politics.
He’s known as one of the primary authors of the 2018 tax bill which was
just signed into law by President Trump, and Hatch said he’s happy to
retire at the height of his career.

President Trump wished Orrin Hatch would run for his 8th term as senator
saying: “*You are a true fighter, Orrin. And I have to say, I've gotten
to know him very well. I've gotten to know a lot of people very well.
You meet fighters and you meet people that you thought were fighters but
they're not so good at fighting. He's a fighter. We hope you will
continue to serve your state and your country in the Senate for a very
long time to come."*

People have known for a long time that Monson wasn’t long for this world
and Orrin Hatch’s retirement comes at a very convenient time for a
vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. I sincerely don’t think the church
will be so heavy handed as to elect Hatch into the Quorum, especially
because he’ll be gone within another decade or two, but a son or nephew
who is in his 30s or 40s like Monson was in 1963 when he became an
apostle who would one day lead the church as prophet, that doesn’t seem
too far-fetched to me.

Let’s put a pin in that for a minute.

I want to speak briefly about Warren Jeffs to add to what was said back
in Part 4 of his time running the FLDS in Short Creek. For those of you
who have been keeping up with the show, you know I travelled to Short
Creek over the holiday season to spend a day and a half in the area and
meet with some of the residents of the area. I’ll have a lot more
reporting to do about my experience down there which will be coming in
the next few weeks as standalone segments while we jump back into our
historical timeline in 1841. But let me just share a little bit of
information I gleaned from the visit to the twin cities of Hildale, UT
and Colorado City, AZ.

One line which stuck with me that Terrill Musser said was that Warren
Jeffs basically worshipped Hitler. The level of control Jeffs exerted on
the FLDS in the twin cities, in Texas, Colorado, and South Dakota is
highly reminiscent of the second or third Reich when it came to the
methods Jeffs employed to control his people. They consecrated
everything to the church’s UEP, including their homes, furniture, cars,
and anything they got their hands on. During this time, Jeffs absorbed a
number of successful companies into the UEP and sucked them dry of all
capital and drove most of them into the ground to live high on the
profits, he isn’t a very good business-man. We could continue to discuss
what Jeffs did ad nauseum, but I’ll spare doing so to draw a line
between the two points floating in the ether of this episode.

Warren Jeffs operated within the constraints of the resources provided
to him. He was divine ruler over some 10,000 people and had complete and
total control over the government of the Twin Cities. He caused
unmitigated damage to the various institutions and infrastructure of the
town and now the people are left with Short Creek being a shadow of it’s
former self to rebuild from all the damage that’s been inflicted. Jeffs
was able to throw around the capital of the UEP, estimated at $110mn
when it was under his control, to accomplish whatever he saw as
necessary or good in his little Reich.

Similarly, the Mormon prophet operated within his constraints to
accomplish whatever he saw as necessary or good in the Utah Reich. Utah
is moved and shaped by the Mormon church. They throw around billions of
dollars in capital and tithing and the voices of millions of adherents
to create and perpetuate a government and populace that will bend to
their will and never exert control or regulation over this massive
multinational corporation. In that way I think we can see some
interesting similarities between the LDS and the FLDS prophets beyond
simply sharing a core set of doctrine and beliefs. Yes, they are
different in many ways, but the two religions may be a bit more similar
than many people are comfortable with. Rest assured that if Warren Jeffs
happened to have the means and resources of the LDS church at his
disposal, he would be committing those means to lobbying and political
machinations just like the LDS church currently does.

But let’s take a step back. Thomas Monson was no Warren Jeffs. Jeffs is
an abhorrent man with proclivities towards raping young men and women
who see him as god on earth. For all I can tell, Monson is worlds apart
from Jeffs in many respects, but… they are both prophets of God with
people fawning over their every word as if straight from the mouth of
God. Just because one prophet commits certain atrocities and another
prophet doesn’t, that doesn’t mean they’re dissimilar in many other
ways. Both of these religions fall somewhere on a gradient totalitarian
control and both employ similar mechanisms with different means to
accomplish their will.

I can’t personally raise any criticisms against Monson that I don’t have
of the church at large because he was, by most standards, a good human
being, even though he espoused ideas that were antiquated and bigoted by
today’s standards. What I can raise objections to is the societal
loophole which allows people like Monson or Jeffs to become venerated by
their respective communities and grants them religious exemptions to do
whatever they please under the guise of freedom of religion.

One thing I can’t escape where the FLDS and the LDS really strike
similar tones is the fact that whatever we see going on at the surface
level is nothing like what is really happening behind closed doors. We
know some of the most egregious crimes committed by Warren Jeffs and we
know of the most stalwart examples of the Mormon church spending
hundreds of millions of dollars on lobbying efforts, but that’s just
what catches our attention. I can’t help but see that there is a
Mormonism which operates behind closed doors, outside the scope and
reach of any journalist, historian, or average chapel-attending Mormon.
The apostles no longer keep journals using the justification that they
could be used against the church at a later time, and similarly I toured
Warren Jeffs’ home while in Short Creek and saw with my own eyes the
hidden document room where they kept all their sealing records. These
religions have more power than we could ever imagine. They operate in a
world outside of any government or non-government oversight or
regulation. They use the influence of insane amounts of money and
tightly woven personal relationships with high-ranking government
officials to protect and expand their never-ceasing power.

The most insane part of all of this is what the LDS church has done to
the FLDS. They’ve sponsored and condoned the various raids in Short
Creek and Texas. When Jeffs was taken prisoner and going through trial,
a Mormon Utah Judge removed the UEP from FLDS control and instated an
ex-FLDS current practicing LDS attorney to be the director over the UEP
and control its funds. Yes, an LDS person controls the piggy-bank of the
FLDS. What better way to fuel the FLDS persecution narrative that was
born out of the 1930s when the two churches excommunicated each other?
The LDS church has so much power over Mormonism and that power doesn’t
stop at just Mormonism, it extends to the government in Utah, the
federal government in small doses, and their reach has been spanning to
third-world countries for the past 150 years in even smaller doses.

Let me give you a snapshot of what will happen in the next few months.
I’m taking this from a post of the exmormon subreddit, posted by user
FaithfulTBM, I think the name is ironic.

The order of operations for selecting a new prophet falls to seniority
with a bit of pomp and circumstance to give it the air of the divine.
The brethren will spend the next few days meeting with family and
friends to set up the funeral proceedings for Monson, after which
they’ll convene a meeting in the temple beginning with a session in
temple clothes, after which the Q14 will change into regular business
attire to continue the meeting. The second most senior apostle, Dallin
H. Oaks, will move that Russel M. Nelson be set apart and ordained as
President of the Church, which will be seconded by M. Russell Ballard,
who is currently third in seniority.

The motion will not be tabled yet as is customary in these special
meetings. Soon after the motion is proposed, another junior apostle will
move that it be carried, after which, “Nelson will accept this motion
being moved with tears and (feigned) humility”.

After Nelson accepts, he’ll choose his counselors and all three men will
be ordained to their positions in the new leadership. After this, the
church will announce a press conference, likely in the Church Office
Building, to tell the world the good news of the new appointments and
the new prophet will be sustained in the upcoming April conference as
Prophet, Seer, and Revelator when they will call a new apostle to fill
Nelson’s newly vacant position.

Following that, the Deseret News and everybody with social media
accounts linked to Mormons will laud their new prophet with bios about
Nelson and the newly inaugurated apostle. Then, in another 2 years’ time
when Nelson inevitably passes away, the whole process will be repeated.
Considering the ages of all the next apostles in line, this will
probably happen 5 to 6 times in the next 20 years, and the Mormon
colossus will continue to trundle on in perpetuity, ruled by geriarchs
who’re successively more disconnected from the progressing society in
which Mormonism finds itself. It will continue to spend millions of
dollars on lobbying and buying politicians, historians will wax
distracted by the next salacious release from the Joseph Smith Papers
project. Mormons in first-world countries with access to information
will continue to leave in droves but it won’t match the missionary
efforts the church puts millions of dollars into in third-world
countries to continue to keep the membership numbers rising. Breakoffs
will continue to happen and the LDS church will continue to ignore them
until they become too large and will then do whatever necessary to break
them and take control of their finances the way they did with the FLDS
in Short Creek. The world will keep turning. Mitt Romney, Nephew of a
past apostle will run for Utah Senate to replace Orrin Hatch. Every
Thursday night you’ll see a new episode of the Serial Mormon History
Podcast in whatever podcatcher you use. The Mormon religion will keep
growing and amassing more wealth and gain the favor of more politicians
and presidents. They may slightly move on little issues, maybe in a few
years they’ll grant the priesthood to women but every woman who enters
the leadership after that will be a product of this same system and no
substantial reforms will ever take place. The church will continue to
cover up any wrongdoing on their part, especially when it comes to child
molestation. The variables will change of whatever societal issue the
church faces every day, but the same tired algorithms will remain true.
Maybe, one day, ten thousand earth years from now, historians will look
back on our little 21<sup>st</sup> century and see what happened with
those pesky religions and ideologies and all the atrocities committed by
their adherents since the beginning of written history. They’ll frown on
our modern society with all its significant problems we could solve if
not for the lack of will to do so, but they’ll know which side of
history certain groups of people were on. Let’s make sure we stay on the
right side of history.

NaMo HE

Resuming Historical Timeline next week

FBM \#2

Jonathan Tindell Secular Stories, send in your recording.
