---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 177 – Jo 3.0 Boy Prophet, Seer, &amp; Revelator'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-177-jo-3-0-boy-prophet-seer-revelator/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-177-jo-30-boy-prophet-seer-revelator
category: History
date: 2019-10-18 15:16:32 +0000
---

Ep 177 -- Jo 3.0 Boy Prophet, Seer, & Revelator

On this episode, we dive into a strange occurrence in early 1844. By the
last year of his ministry, Joseph Smith had designated half a dozen
people to be his rightful successors in his absence or in the case of
his death. But, in early 1844, it was finally time for Joseph Smith III
(Jo 3.0) to receive his ordination as rightful heir to the Mormon
mantle. We discuss when it happened, a bunch of other succession
instructions (as well as when and why they were given), and finally
discuss the text of the actual Jo 3.0 succession blessing which was
"discovered" by Mark Hofmann in 1981. The letter was a forgery, but the
RLDS still have the most solid ground for rightful succession. If you
disagree, fight me in the comments about it!

Links:

Mormon Enigma by Linda King Newell and Valeen Tippetts Avery\
<https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/596364.Mormon_Enigma>

Lecture on Faith \#2\
<http://lecturesonfaith.com/2/>

The Mormon Succession Crisis of 1844 by D. Michael Quinn\
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/mormon-succession-crisis-1844>

Joseph Smith III's 1844 Blessing and the Mormons of Utah\
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/43200687.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A80c45321eedd4ec0604851943c320570>

Benjamin Franklin Johnson, My Life's Review\
<https://archive.org/stream/BenjaminFJohnsonMyLifesReview/Benjamin+F+Johnson+My+Lifes+Review_djvu.txt>

Hofmann audio tape Sunstone presentation\
<https://www.sunstonemagazine.com/mark-hofmann-25-years-later/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

We're nearing the end of Joseph Smith's life in June of 1844. There's
still so much to cover, but I thought today we'd go through a bit of
forecasting for what we can expect in the coming future of the History
of Mormonism. I was reading Mormon Enigma, the excellent and
groundbreaking biography of Emma Smith by Linda Newell and Valeen Avery
when I read this short passage on page 175.

> Sometime that spring of 1844, George J. Adams hurried from the red
> brick store to the Mansion to find Emma. He exclaimed, "The matter is
> now settled. We now know who Joseph's successor will be: it is little
> Joseph, I have just seen him ordained by his father." No extant
> account related Emma's reaction to the news, or if it was news at all.
> Perhaps Joseph had told her beforehand. Details of the ceremony,
> however, were preserved by James Whitehead, financial clerk for
> Joseph.
>
> Whitehead told a friend, William W. Blair, in 1873 that he was in the
> outer office at the time, but he heard others discuss the ordination.
> Later, under oath, he remembered there were about twenty-five people
> in attendance. Whitehead said "Hyrum Smith anointed \[the boy\] and
> his father blessed him and ordained him and Newel Whitney poured the
> oil on his head and he was set apart to be his father's successor in
> office, holding all the powers his father held."
>
> As an old man Joseph III could not recall the specifics of the
> blessing, but wrote, "I was called into the room over my fathers store
> in Nauvoo... and was there anointed with oil and blessed by my father,
> and the privileges and callings to fit one to succeed him were
> conferred by name upon me. I was publicly acknowledged by my father to
> be his successor, on the stand in Nauvoo in the presence of hundreds,
> possibly thousands of people." James Whitehead remembered Joseph
> announcing that "I am no longer their prophet," and described him
> "putting his hand on young Joseph's head: and saying, 'This is your
> prophet, I am going to rest.'"

This blessing marking Jo 3.0's ordination as rightful successor is an
important event in Mormon history, and arguably one of the most
disputed. It is notable that these sources were recounted long after the
fact by people who were members of the RLDS church under the leadership
of Jo 3.0 when he assumed the office of prophet and president of the
church in April 1860. The fact that Whitehead reported Jo's speech
during the gathering like he was an old man headed into the woods to die
reveals his memory was plagued with hindsight bias. And, as Avery and
Newell stated, no extant contemporary record exists of the proceeding
that day or the blessing itself. But, why is this so important, yet so
disputed?

You see, Joseph Smith never left behind specific succession instructions
in the event of his death. Every King or ruler of any kind is supposed
to designate his successor prior to his own death, most often his son,
preferably first-born son, but with Joseph Smith it wasn't so simple.

He'd received a revelation in Kirtland that if he should live to his
eighties then he would see the second coming of Jesus. Very few of us
know when we're going to die until the moment it happens and Jo had
evaded death so many times he probably thought himself invincible by
1844. Death was the only event that would remove the mantle of Prophet,
Seer, Revelator, Priest, and King over all of Israel from his shoulders
as he never had any intention of stepping down, but certain events in
Jo's life precipitated him making an effort of appointing a rightful
successor.

But, appointing a successor requires a couple of character qualities Jo
was consistently short on, foresight and willingness to abdicate power
when events require. You see, Jo lived in short increments and made
short-term decisions that most often best suited himself. He was also
very jealous with his power. So much confusion that comes from Mormon
authority fights all hearken back to Jo's suffocating need to be the
sole dictatorial power of the church. He was capable of dictating tasks
to certain individuals, but he was always the decision-maker with final
say. When we consider the offices of priesthood and the constant
evolution of each office's duties throughout Joseph Smith's ministry,
that evolution is hard to reconcile with the idea that Mormonism is a
restoration of the ancient religion instituted by Adam and brought to
its final form through the sacrifice of Jesus, which was subsequently
lost through the dark ages. If the one true religion existed, was lost,
and was subsequently restored by Joseph Smith, why did it evolve so much
in his lifetime and why did it change after his death? How are we to
determine the rightful next prophet when the current prophet dies?

Here's a fun exercise with believing friends and family. Why was Brigham
Young the prophet after Joseph Smith? Usually the answer will be some
wishy-washy form of the office of prophet is dissolved upon his death
and his keys are given to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles so the lord
can call the next prophet when the apostles give all the keys back to
the man who holds the office. Simply ask this friend or family member,
yeah? Where is that found in the Doctrine and Covenants? Is that from
the Book of Mormon? Is it somewhere in the Bible? Is it taken from some
obscure passage in the Pearl of Great Price? The answer is, this doesn't
come from the scriptures because Bloody Brigham Young made it up. He
made it up! There is absolutely no scriptural, or even extra-scriptural
justification for the modern Mormon succession instructions. It's not
found in the Council of Fifty minutes, the Book of the Law of the Lord
during Jo's life, and no public statement from Joseph Smith could ever
be construed to justify this idea of the Apostles inheriting the
Prophet's keys until the next prophet is called by God. For those
reasons, Bloody Brigham was very jealous and proactive in his tenuous
hold on power during the first 2 decades of his presidency. Brigham's
power plays will come into focus as we progress through today's episode.

The fact that Mormons today are unable to answer the authority and
succession questions with any hard scriptural justifications merely
underscores the fact that succession was a great source of controversy
and division after Jo's death. This isn't because Jo didn't name a
rightful successor, it's because he named so many of them at different
periods of his life due to different extenuating circumstances. We're
going to discuss those extensively, but first let's lay some groundwork.

Mormon theology is obsessed with pure bloodlines. Pure knowledge is
transferred from fathers to sons. Prophets throughout the Book of Mormon
are almost exclusively sons of the previous prophets, almost always the
first-born. But it runs deeper than the Book of Mormon.

The Lectures on Faith used to be included as the Doctrine part of the
Doctrine and Covenants, but were removed in 1921 making it just the Book
of Covenants. The Lectures on Faith weren't present in the first edition
of the Doctrine and Covenants, because it was titled the Book of
Commandments and printed in 1833, which simply contained many of Jo's
revelations up to 1832. Jo's first military expedition in 1834 came to
be known as Zion's camp, which we'll discuss soon. The expedition was a
colossal failure, but upon his return to Kirtland he formed the School
of Elders, the first official male Sunday school gathering for teaching
deep Mormon Doctrine to initiates. In this School of Elders, various
lectures were devised by Jo and Hingepin Sidney Rigdon. They collected 7
of these lectures and included them with the expanded edition of Jo's
revelations, which became the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and
Covenants. It used to be the Book of Commandments, the lectures on faith
were the added doctrine part so this new book was published under the
new title Doctrine & Covenants.

One of the Lectures on Faith discusses extensively how true knowledge of
God came through Adam to our current generation. It's Lecture \#2 and
the entire thing is painful. Marie and I read through it on My Book of
Mormon podcast back in October of 2018 so go listen there if you want to
grind through it with us, but here's a small sampling to illustrate my
point from verses 31 and 33.

> 31 Adam thus being made acquainted with God, communicated the
> knowledge which he had unto his posterity; and it was through this
> means that the thought was first suggested to their minds that there
> was a God. Which laid the foundation for the exercise of their faith,
> through which they could obtain a knowledge of his character and also
> of his glory.
>
> [33](http://lecturesonfaith.com/2/#33) From this we can see that the
> whole human family, in the early age of their existence, in all their
> different branches, had this knowledge disseminated among them; so
> that the existence of God became an object of faith, in the early age
> of the world. And the evidences which these men had of the existence
> of a God, was the testimony of their fathers in the first instance.

Not only is the perfect gospel passed from father to son, but even the
very knowledge of the existence of god is passed through patriarchal
posterity. The entire lecture is like 56 verses with another 148
questions in the Q&A section, so a quick summary is that this gospel has
passed from father to son for all human history and has been the source
of the drive for people to learn and understand the nature and mind of
god. More than illustrating how much of a windbag Hingepin Sidney Rigdon
is, even giving yours truly a run for his money, the lecture
encapsulates how important patriarchal succession is truly at the very
roots of Mormonism. The Book of Mormon includes it as an underlying
implication, the Doctrine & Covenants illustrates male-lineal succession
explicitly, and the Book of Abraham extends this succession to not only
blessings but curses being passed from fathers to sons.

The reason I bring this up is to illustrate that anybody claiming that
Jo didn't believe one of his sons would be his successor to the mantle
of Mormon Prophet, Seer, and Revelator doesn't have any idea what the
hell they're talking about. Very few things in Mormon theology are as
cut and dry as the doctrine of patriarchal familial succession. Joseph
Smith III was the rightful successor to his father in every sane world
that takes into account the totality of Mormon theology.

You may be sitting there thinking, hey, the Mormon church had two
prophets named Joseph Smith in the 20^th^ century, and you're right.
But, both Joseph F. Smith, and Joseph Fielding Smith were nephew and
grand-nephew of Joseph Smith, they were sons of Jo's older brother,
Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. At the time of his death in 1844, Jo had 7
male sons born to him. The first, highlighting how important first-born
lineal succession is, was named Alvin Smith. This also hearkens to the
likelihood that Alvin Smith was originally designated as the prophet but
Jo stepped into his place upon Alvin's death in 1823, seven years before
the Book of Mormon was published. Jo and Emma's son, little Alvin, only
lived a few hours and perished. His next son who would become the
rightful heir to the Mormon throne met a similar fate as Alvin. Young
Thaddeus and his twin sister, Louisa, were born premature and died a few
hours after their births. Jo and Emma adopted Joseph and Julia Murdock,
twins born 2 weeks after Thaddeus and Louisa, but twins who had killed
their mother during childbirth. This adopted Joseph Murdock Smith died
at 10 months old after falling ill to exposure in 1832. We discussed
this all the way back on Episode 26 of the show when Jo was dragged out
of the house and beaten, tarred and feathered, and nearly poisoned and
castrated. Joseph Murdock Smith likely wouldn't have made for a rightful
successor as he wasn't even Jo's pure blood.

However, in November of that same year, 1832, young Joseph III was born,
the first Smith infant from Jo and Emma that lived more than a few hours
past childbirth. The third son of Joseph bearing the same name, the
first to survive childhood, made Jo 3.0, as Marie and I call him on My
Book of Mormon, the perfect candidate to inherit the mantle of prophet
upon his father's death.

A question remained though, when was the rightful time to designate Jo
3.0 as the rightful heir? When should he be endowed as the son to take
the office of President and sole King over all Israel, especially as Jo
himself was showing no signs of aging, illness, or slowing down his
empire-building campaign? A proper king names his heir on his deathbed,
but Jo didn't realistically expect to be on his deathbed anytime soon.
The events which precipitated Jo 3.0's succession blessing in early 1844
alluded to at the beginning of the episode aren't really clear, but for
whatever reason this was chosen as the right time to give Jo 3.0 his
blessing at age 11.

We'll get to that blessing in a bit, but first let's speculate on what
may have precipitated this blessing at this time based on the data set
provided of all the previous people Jo designated as his successors in
some way.

For this I'll be leaning on the work of D. Michael Quinn in Mormon
Hierarchy, Origins of Power, and an article he published in 1976 in BYU
Studies titled the Mormon Succession Crisis of 1844. We'll also be
discussing an article Quinn wrote for the John Whitmer Historical
Journal. There's a significant wrinkle to this blessing and the related
articles that we'll be discussing near the end of the episode.

Let's get into the meat here. There wasn't a clear path of succession at
Jo's death simply because he didn't leave clear instructions. From
Quinn's 1976 BYU Studies article:

> As President of The Church of Jesus of Latter-day Saints since its
> establishment in 1830, Joseph Smith, Jr., had been the apex of a
> pyramid of ecclesiastical leadership, but to many people he was viewed
> as though he were the keystone of the existence of Mormonism. In this
> view, as the removal of the keystone from an arch causes the arch to
> collapse, it was assumed that the entire LDS Church would collapse if
> at Smith's death the role of the president were not filled properly
> and to the satisfaction of the general membership. A small group of
> men, most notably the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, had received
> private instruction from Joseph Smith in the spring of 1844 concerning
> the proper mode of succession. These private instructions, however,
> were unknown to the general membership of the LDS Church. In fact, by
> the summer of 1844 there was no explicit outline of presidential
> succession in print. This laid the foundation for a succession crisis
> among the Latter-day Saints when Joseph Smith was murdered by a mob on
> 27 June 1844. Not only did most Mormons have only the haziest concept
> of what should transpire in the leadership of the LDS Church if the
> founding prophet were to die, but between 1834 and 1844 Joseph Smith
> had by word or action established precedents or authority for eight
> possible methods of succession: 1) by a counselor in the First
> Presidency, 2) by a special appointment, 3) through the office of
> Associate President, 4) by the Presiding Patriarch, 5) by the Council
> of Fifty, 6) by the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, 7) by three
> priesthood councils, 8) by a descendant of Joseph Smith, Jr. In time,
> all but one of the major claimants were invalidated by their personal
> circumstances or the insufficiency of their personal circumstances or
> the insufficiency of their claims.
>
> For those few to whom Joseph had given definite instructions relating
> to succession, their course following the martyrdom was clear once the
> shock of that event passed, but for the average Mormon the death of
> Joseph Smith, Jr., created a sometimes prolonged crisis in which it
> was necessary to decide which of conflicting succession claimants was
> authorized of God. The schismatic fragmentation of the LDS Church that
> followed the martyrdom resulted from a multiplicity of succession
> precedents and a general lack of uniform understanding of what Joseph
> Smith's provisions for succession actually were.

The first mention of possible succession came in a revelation Jo
provided in March of 1833. Canonized as section 90 of today's LDS D&C,
verses 5 and 6 say:

> And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they
> hold them, lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought
> under condemnation thereby; and stumble and fall, when the storms
> descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon
> their house.
>
> And again, verily I say unto they brethren, Sidney Rigdon and
> Frederick G. Williams, their sins are forgiven them also, and they are
> accounted as equal with thee in holding the keys of this last kingdom.

This was 1833, the earliest true succession instruction we can find. It
states that when Jo is absent, his presidency holds equivalent power as
the prophet. But, this doesn't explicitly state that they would be the
ones to take over when Jo dies, it merely says they are equal. To make
this more explicit, when Jo was about to head out on Zion's Camp, the
first Mormon military campaign from Kirtland to Missouri to restore the
Mormons back to their land and property from which the Missourians drove
them, Jo decided it was a good idea to leave explicit instructions as to
who would run the church while he was gone.

On 19 April, 1834, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Zebedee Coltrin
"laid hands upon bro. Sidney, and confirmed upon him the blessings of
wisdom and knowledge to preside over the church in the absence of
brother Joseph."

Quin points out that 'absence' doesn't mean 'death', which make these
instructions less cut-and-dry than we'd hope. But, consider the context
of when this was given. Jo was leaving the Kirtland HQ behind for a
military expedition he didn't want to lead in the first place. Every
military leader needs a trusted right-hand man back at home to keep the
lights on and pick up the mail while the leader is on his crusade. That
was all this designation really did. It merely appointed Hingepin Rigdon
to be the acting prophet until Jo returned. However, the subtext of this
appointment is important to keep in mind. If Jo died during the march,
which he almost did from cholera, Hingepin Rigdon would be the right
guy. Jo had blessed him with all the wisdom and knowledge to preside
over the church and no other person had such a blessing given to them.
Jo 3.0 wasn't even two years old when this blessing was given to Rigdon
so he was in no place to lead the church if his father died in a
firefight even though he was the first-surviving son and the rightful
heir.

The idea of Jo 3.0 being his father's rightful successor was recognized
by Hingepin Sidney Rigdon during the succession crisis in 1844. Rigdon's
claim to power hearkened to this 1834 blessing Jo gave him, but that was
to basically keep the presidency functioning as "guardians" of the
church until Jo 3.0 came of age to lead the church. Of course, Brigham's
jealous advocacy for dissolution of the presidency upon the prophet's
death was directly opposed to Rigdon's position as Rigdon posed the
greatest legitimate threat to Bloody Brigham's power grab. Rigdon's
position and influence in the church had waned through the Nauvoo years,
but he was running as Jo's Vice-Presidential candidate during the 1844
election so to some extent their relationship had been repaired by
mid-1844.

Rigdon took an active role in fighting against Bloody Brigham's power
grab. The public largely sided with Brigham after a demonstration we'll
discuss when it comes up. But, after that demonstration, Rigdon
attempted to form his own church in opposition to Brigham and the Quorum
of Apostles. As Quinn reports from his 1976 BYU Studies article:

> Bitterly disappointed, Rigdon refused the offer of the apostles to
> continue functioning under their direction. The seriousness of
> Rigdon's position and the threat he represented in 1844 was indicated
> in the journal of one of the apostles, George A. Smith:
>
> Tuesday Sept 3 I Learned Elder Rigdon was Making a Division in the
> Church ordaining Prophets Priests & Kings contrary to the Say of God
> The Twelve visited him he Said his Authority was Greater than ours
> Seemed Determined to Scatter the Church and Led up A Party he Claimed
> to have many visions and Revelation and at varance with those Given
> Prest Joseph Smith We Labored With him till 9 o'clock at Night and
> after Deliberation desfeloshiped him & Sent Elders P P Pratt O Hide A
> Lyman to Demand his Licenc he was angry he Said he Would Expose the
> Counsels of the Church and Publish all he knew against us he knew the
> Church had not Been Led By the Spirit to God for Long time.11
>
> Unable to tolerate Rigdon's schismatic activities, the Quorum of the
> Twelve prepared to excommunicate him.

Succession was anything but a clean transition of power in 1844. Rigdon
always had this 1834 ordination to fall back on, but it clearly wasn't
enough to sway public opinion for so many factors we'll explore in
future episodes. Rigdon's co-counselor in the presidency had been
designation as Freddy G. Willey back in the 1833 revelation, but he died
2 years before Jo died and the schism crisis was born. The man who
replaced Freddy G. Willey? That was William Law, the primary author of
the Nauvoo Expositor which catalyzed Jo's death in the first place.
Needless to say, Law wasn't in the proper place to lead the main body of
Mormons alongside Rigdon until Jo 3.0 was old enough to inherit the
mantle. However, this did not stop Law from leading his own small schism
for a very brief period before it was absorbed into much larger
contingents of Mormons.

Rightful successors dying or being removed from good standing in the
church had also affected the ordination of David Whitmer to be rightful
successor when he was ordained in July of 1834 when Zion's Camp reached
its destination. From volume 3 of the History of the Church reporting a
sermon Jo gave in March of 1838.

> President Joseph Smith, Jr. gave a history of the ordination of David
> Whitmer, which took place in July 1834, to be a leader or a prophet to
> this church, which \[ordination\] was on condition that he \[J. Smith,
> Jr.\] did not live to \[see\] God himself.

This was all well and good, but in a mere month after this sermon, Jo
and Hingepin Rigdon would write the Danite Manifesto charging David
Whitmer, John Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery with apostasy giving them 48
hours to vacate Far West, Missouri or get a visit from the Danites.
David Whitmer was still alive when Jo died in 1844 and he used this 1834
ordination as his claim to power to lead his followers, colloquially
referred to as the Whitmerites, until his death in 1888. D-Day David
Whitmer and Hingepin Rigdon weren't the only ones to receive a direct
succession ordination prior to Jo's death. A major confounding player in
all of this was a guy named James J. Strang. We'll be discussing Strang
extensively in coming shows, but suffice it to say, Strang emerged after
the death of Jo with a letter of succession ordination dated the week
before Jo was shot dead in Carthage Jail.

> behold my servant James J Strang hath come to thee from far truth when
> he knew it not & hath not rejected it but hath had faith in thee the
> shepherd and stone of israel & to him shall the gathering of the
> people be fore he shall plant a stake of Zion in Wisconsin & I will
> establish it & there shall my people have peace & rest & shall not be
> moved

Quinn continues with his assessment of the letter as follows:

> Even at face value, the letter seemed to be no more than a local
> appointment, but Strang insisted the document designated him as
> Joseph's successor. Rather than presenting his claims to the Church in
> Nauvoo, Strang announced his position at a conference of the Church at
> Florence, Michigan, on 5 August 1844. The presiding elder of that
> branch, Crandall Dunn, denounced the claim as an imposture and
> observed that the postmark on the envelope of Strang's letter proved
> it to have been a forgery.21 Brigham Young in 1846 denounced the
> entire letter as a forgery: "Every person acquainted with Joseph
> Smith, and his style of dictation and writing might readily know that
> he never wrote nor caused to be written that letter to Strang."22
> Modern analysts of the document have not only agreed with that
> verdict, but have also judged the signature of Joseph Smith on the
> letter to be a forgery.23 In addition to the letter, Strang also
> claimed that he had been ordained successor by an angel. Persisting in
> his claims, he was excommunicated by the branch at Florence, Michigan,
> on 5 August 1844, an action that was repeated by the apostles at
> Nauvoo

Of course Bloody Brigham called it a forgery, because Strang was a huge
threat. Regardless of his denunciation and Strang's excommunication from
the church, Strang was a charismatic leader and was openly opposed to
the practice of polygamy, making him an appealing candidate and the
leader of the second-largest community of Mormon in the wake of the
schism crisis until his assassination in 1856. Like I said, we'll
discuss Strang extensively in the future, but the point I'm making with
introducing him into this discussion is that secretive ordinations of
leaders in the church and designating successors made the problem of
discerning Jo's true intent immensely challenging for the body of
Mormons at large. Who do they follow when they have 8 different people
coming forward claiming to be the next prophet and the most reasonable
next prophet Jo 3.0, is only 11 years old? It was a conundrum that held
the exaltation of every average Mormon in the balance of their own
decision.

Other people had stronger claim to lead factions than James Strang with
his forged letter. Lyman Wight is an interesting example of this.
Immediately prior to Jo's death, Lyman Wight, the Wild Ram of the
Mountains, was tasked with taking a group of Mormons to settle in Texas.
Bloody Brigham tried to recall him from this mission, but Wight directly
opposed Brigham's decree because he was on a mission from God. He wrote
this, which I'm reading from Quinn's BYU Studies article:

> This revolation of the Lord was given by the angel of the seventh
> dispensation and was to continue during my life it was given by the
> highest authority that then was and I can not see any use or benefit
> it could be to alter it especially as their is no power on earth that
> can do it. . . . my mission was to continue during my life and as
> Joseph never found fault with me and no other man has authority to do
> so I think my case will lay over till the Lord takes me to himself.

While this "revolation" doesn't explicitly state that Lyman Wight was to
be an actual successor, it does show that Wight understood he wasn't
beholden to the power claims of Bloody Brigham and the Quorum of Twelve.
However, this revelation was given in secret, which constitutes a
central issue of many of these ordinations for succession and
leadership. The church was supposed to operate by Common Consent.
Members were supposed to vote on changes in leadership and for
canonizing revelations to become church scripture. Jo had abandoned that
practice as the church grew and became less homogenous; he operated more
of the church in the shadows as his ministry aged. But, if Jo blessed
one guy with being the rightful successor and only three other guys were
in the room at the time, as soon as Jo died and that guy came forward
saying he would be the next prophet, what reason did the public have to
believe him? James Strang was one of the earliest to claim secretive
succession and therefore garnered the largest following aside from the
Quorum of Apostles. Another of these came from Alpheus Cutler, a member
since 1833 who was born before the Constitution of the United States was
ratified. Cutler formed his church after briefly following the Quorum of
Apostles to Iowa when he spoke of a secretive ordination. Once again
from Quinn's BYU article:

> Joseph Smith, sometimes prior to his death, organized a Quorum of
> Seven, all of whom were ordained under his hand to the prophetic
> office; with all the rights, keys, powers, privileges, and blessings
> belonging to that condition. The only difference in the ordinations of
> the seven, was in the case of Alpheus Cutler, whose right to act as
> prophet, seer and revelator was to be in force upon the whole world
> from that very hour. Under this ordination, he claimed an undisputed
> right to organize and build up the kingdom the same as Joseph had
> done.

This Quorum of Seven is something which hasn't survived in the
Brighamite tradition of the church to this day, but is frequently used
by many fundamentalist groups with various names including Council of
Friends, Council of Seven, Holy Council of Friends, and dozens of other
names. When Jo supposedly formed this Quorum of Seven, the leadership of
the church was in constant flux as it could have only come in late
spring of 1844 as chaos continued to unfold politically, religiously,
and socially for the Mormons. But, once again, Cutler's claim to
rightful succession was in competition with half a dozen others in
1844-8 and only gained a relatively small following because his
ordination was secretive to begin with and never announced from the
pulpit for public approval.

Oliver Cowdery was absent during the succession crisis because he'd been
excommunicated and removed from the body of Mormons back in 1838.
However, he was the scribe for the Book of Mormon, the second elder of
the church, and one of the three witnesses to the plates. He was royalty
who'd been cast aside when his personal opinions about the sanctity of
marriage conflicted with Jo's and his alliance with the Whitmers
represented the greatest threat to Jo's power in Missouri. However,
Ollie had been ordained as "Associate President" to the church in
December of 1834, after Jo's return from Zion's Camp when he was
conceiving of the first massive structural organizational shift in the
church adding the Quorum of Twelve, 2 Quorums of Seventies, and creating
dozens of other auxiliary leadership and middle-management positions.
What was an Associate President? It didn't matter much because Cowdery
was exiled in 1844 when the question could be answered, but according to
Quinn:

> Cowdery's minutes of his ordination indicate that he was not merely
> made an assistant whose role was subordinate to the first and second
> counselors in the First Presidency:
>
> The office of Assistant President is to assist in presiding over the
> whole church, and to officiate in the absence of the President,
> according to their his rank and appointment, viz: President Cowdery,
> first; President Rigdon Second, and President Williams Third, as they
> were severally called. The office of this Priesthood is also to act as
> Spokesman-taking Aaron for an ensample.33
>
> Although introduced as a member of the First Presidency after Rigdon
> and Williams, Cowdery was given supremacy over them. In fact, the
> definition of his powers gave Cowdery joint control with the Prophet.
> In the absence of Joseph Smith, Cowdery was president and the first
> and second counselors were his counselors.

Cowdery was a great candidate for next prophet if Jo had died in 1835 or
36 as he was essentially co-president with Jo. But, because he was
estranged, Cowdery was nowhere near viable.

Another possible path of succession could have gone towards the
Patriarch of the church. The way the Brighamite church is structured
today is that each stake has their own patriarch who gives patriarchal
blessings. Patriarchal blessings are essentially a rite of passage for
Mormons, usually undertaken in their teens. But, the office of patriarch
in Jo's church was wildly different. The first person called in 1833 to
be patriarch was literally Jo's patriarch, Joseph Sr., Big Daddy Cheese.
He was given a monthly stipend and a per-blessing fee for giving
patriarchal blessings to members. He gave hundreds, many of which have
survived and have been archived by church genealogists. Big Daddy Cheese
died in September of 1840 and conferred his office of Patriarch of the
church to Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. Jo said of this event in May of
1843, "The Patriarchal office is the highest office in the church, and
father Smith conferred this office, on Hyrum Smith, on his deathbed."
Soon after this public declaration, Jo said in June of 1843, less than a
month before the polygamy revelation was given, "that Hyrum Smith should
'hold the office of prophet to the Church, as it was his birthright,'".

This is tough to work with, because Big Daddy Cheese was never in a
position above his son, Jo, in the church. The office of Patriarch
didn't hold much authority, it was a purely revelatory role in that the
duty of the patriarch is to give blessings to parishioners. But, the
actual role of the presiding patriarch had evolved in the short 4 years
Hyrum had been presiding patriarch. Big Daddy Cheese's role in the
church was merely advisory and giving blessings until his death. Hyrum,
on the other hand, was an active participant in the decision-making
process of the church, gave his own revelations, had taken plural wives,
and was completely inseparable from his younger brother. Jo declaring
that Hyrum holds the office of prophet to the church and that this
office is the highest office in the church as was Hyrum's birthright
meant that presiding patriarch wasn't just an emeritus auxiliary role to
the leadership of the church, it was an executive leadership position.
Even the name of the office invokes that of a father, one who holds some
level of dominion over the church within this theology, and Hyrum
exercised his role. Upon Hyrum and Jo's death, Samuel Harrison Smith
followed them to the grave only a month later, Crazy Willy Smith was the
last-surviving Smith brother who jealously advocated for a strong role
in the church leadership Bloody Brigham was slowly forming with the
Quorum of Apostles at the head. Bloody Brigham quashed Crazy Willy's
moves and usurped his power by neutering the office of Presiding
Patriarch. This wasn't hard for Bloody Brigham to do because Crazy Willy
wasn't held in the highest regard by most of the church, especially with
previously owning a brothel in Nauvoo and openly advocating for the
practice of Spiritual Wifery. Plus, Jo and Crazy Willy had a couple of
public spats which included physical encounters which cast a cloud of
doubt over Willy being level-headed enough to be in any powerful role of
the church.

The primary avenue of succession which was actually exploited by Bloody
Brigham during the crisis was the Council of Fifty. We've discussed the
Council extensively but suffice it to say the Council of Fifty or
Council of YTFIF if you listen to Latter-day Lesbian podcast, was the
government Jo established to replace the American government when he
finally took it over. All of the Quorum of Apostles were members of the
Council of Fifty. Keep in mind, the Council of Fifty continued to meet
with Bloody Brigham often as chairperson after Jo's death. He was
usually the guy calling the shots in the Council meetings which he used
to slowly move the leadership in degrees toward favoring him as rightful
president and follow his decision-making. Apparently a speech that Jo
made during a certain meeting of the Council of Fifty led some members
to believe that he was designating the council as a whole to be the
rightful successor in the event of his death or absence.

This quote comes from a guy named Benjamin F. Johnson and I'm going to
read it from Quinn's paper in a moment, but first a precursor on
Benjamin F. Johnson to understand this quote in proper context. Johnson
was one of the youngest, possible THE youngest members of the Council of
Fifty at age 26. He was the youngest member of the Army of Israel during
the Missouri-Mormon war of 1838 and participated actively in the raids
of the non-Mormon settlements. He helped to bury and later unearth a
cannon the Mormons stole from the Missouri militia and was taken
prisoner and released by the Missourians. He was also an early
practitioner of polygamy and Jo married his older sister, Delcena with
Benjamin officiating the ceremony sometime in spring of 1842. He was
totally in the faith and he was a firebrand who zealously fought for the
cause of building the Kingdom of God on earth.

There's an apocryphal self-reported story from his life reminiscence,
which we'll discuss in a minute, about when he was a prisoner of the
Missouri militia. According to Johnson, a man put a pistol to little
Ben's head and said "You give up Mormonism right now, or I'll shoot
you." Because that's how stuff like that worked. It wasn't "tell us
where Joseph Smith is," or "tell us where you hid the cannon and rifles
you stole from us," no, it was a death threat for him to renounce his
religion. Johnson said he refused to renounce the faith and the guy
pulled the trigger but the gun misfired. He cursed the gun which had
never misfired in 20 years and primed it again and attempted to shoot
Johnson again, and the gun again misfired. It happened a third time when
another Missourian told him to fix his gun and then "you can kill the
cuss all right". Then, the Missourian tried a fourth and final time to
shoot Benjamin Franklin Johnson, at which point the gun exploded in his
hand and killed the assailant, leaving Johnson completely unharmed.
Another Missourian who just watched his friend die by his own gun
exploding in his hand apparently quipped "You'd better not try to kill
that man."

So, does Benjamin F. Johnson sound like a trustworthy source to you,
dear listener? With that in mind, Benjamin F. Johnson recalled a
specific meeting of the Council of Fifty in his memoir, My Life's
Review, which he dictated some time before his death in the Brighamite
tradition, but for some reason or another wasn't published until 1947.
So, this meeting he remembered where Jo designated the Council of Fifty
as the rightful successor in case he died was remembered by Johnson,
probably 50-60 years after the meeting actually happened, and the
account wasn't published until more than 100 years after the meeting.
That's my way of saying this is account is questionable and even that is
being generous.

> At one of the last meetings of the Council of Fifty after all had been
> completed and the keys of power committed, and in the presence of the
> Quorum of the Twelve and others who were encircled around him, he
> arose, gave a review of his life and sufferings, and of the
> testimonies he had borne, and said that the Lord had now accepted his
> labors and sacrifices, and did not require him any longer to carry the
> responsibilities and burden and bearing off of this kingdom, and
> turning to those around him, including the 12, he said, "And in the
> name of the Lord Jesus Christ I now place it upon you my brethren of
> the council and I shake my skirts clear of all responsibility from
> this time forth," springing from the floor and shaking his skirt at
> the same time.

Quinn goes on to point out a detail within the record that various
church leaders acted in accordance with this line of thinking, even if
Benjamin's recounting of it simply can't be trusted.

> Following the death of Joseph Smith, the apostles almost immediately
> referred to his remarks on this occasion as indicating the right of
> the Quorum of the Twelve to govern the Church in his absence.59
> Nevertheless, the Kingdom of God in Mormonism was both ecclesiastical
> and temporal. The "Keys to the Kingdom" rested upon the shoulders of
> the Council of Fifty, which included the Quorum of the Twelve
> Apostles. In 1846, Brigham Young stated: "Wherever the 12 & Council
> are there will the Keys be also."60 Thus, it is not strange that some
> members of the Council of Fifty regarded that body as having a right
> of succession to lead and organize the Church.

But also consider this, each and every one of those members of the
Quorum of Apostles and the Council of Fifty had vested interests in
making sure the power was publicly shifted to the Quorum. All of them
had internal and external motivating factors making them act in
accordance with Bloody Brigham's 40-year vision of taking power and
moving the Mormons to Mexico.

There was, however, some scriptural precedence that the Quorum of
Apostles were equal in authority to the prophet, in the way the three
branches of government are equal in power in theory, even if in practice
there is some disparity.

Section III of the 1835 D&C is titled "ON PRIESTHOOD" and it was given
in April of 1835 right before printing of the 1835 edition began. It was
included as section III presumably because it would be one of the
earliest read to any new readers. It begins by creating the two
different priesthoods, Aaronic and Melchizedek, which was mostly unknown
before this revelation was printed and read by average Mormons. The
section continues to lay out the leadership structure of the church and
the duties of various offices. Verse 11 of the 1835 edition, 21-26 of
the modern D&C 107. As I read this you'll find what I mean when it's set
up similar to the government with 3 co-equal branches of ruling power,
the Presidency, the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and the Quorum of
Seventy.

> 11 Of necessity there are presidents, or presiding offices growing out
> of, or appointed of, or from among those who are ordained to the
> several offices in these two priesthoods.
>
> Of the Melchizedek priesthood, three presiding high priests, chosen by
> the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the
> confidence, faith and prayer of the church, form a quorum of
> the presidency of the church.
>
> The twelve travelling counsellors are called to be
> the twelve apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ, in
> all the world: thus differing from other officers in the church in the
> duties of their calling.
>
> And they form a quorum equal in authority and power to the three
> presidents, previously mentioned.
>
> The seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial
> witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world. Thus differing from
> other officers in the church in the duties of their calling:
>
> and they form a quorum equal in authority to that of
> the twelve especial witnesses or apostles, just named.
>
> And every descision made by either of these quorums, must be by the
> unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must
> be agreed to its decisions in order to make their decisions of the
> same power or validity one with the other.

Three co-equal branches of church leadership established in 1835. It
should be no mystery what Jo had in mind as a 30-year plan for the
United States when we read this revelation in the context of his
military campaign and general lawlessness of the previous 4 years of his
ministry.

At the end of the day, Bloody Brigham's power grab was successful. We'll
discuss the subtle and overt movements Brigham made in the coming
succession crisis on this podcast, but suffice it to say he was
successful. As Quinn states in this BYU Studies article, which you'll
find in the show notes, of course:

> The Quorum of the Twelve was a known and trusted entity to the
> Mormons. As early as 27 March 1836, the apostles had been sustained
> with the First Presidency as "Prophets and Seers."74 With their
> prophet dead and mobs menacing Nauvoo, the Quorum of the Twelve seemed
> to be the only stability upon which Mormons could depend. After 8
> August 1844, the Church emerged from its crisis. An unsettled mode of
> succession could have destroyed it; the Quorum of the Twelve was
> determined that such a crisis should never be repeated. The apostles
> were careful, however, to specify that the place of Joseph Smith would
> never be filled by another. In an epistle of the Quorum of the Twelve
> to the Church, on 15 August 1844 they stated: "Let no man presume for
> a moment that his \[Joseph Smith's\] place will be filled by another;
> for, remember he stands in his own place, and always will."75 When the
> membership of the Church voted on 8 August to accept to Twelve
> Apostles as the First Presidency of the Church, they were not voting
> for a successor to Joseph Smith. The Mormons were simply acknowledging
> the fact that the Quorum of the Twelve presided over the Church by
> virtue of known Revelation and by the recognized ascendance given to
> them by the founding Prophet. Nevertheless, by virtue of his being
> president and senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles,
> Brigham Young was already acting as President of the LDS Church. As
> early as 5 December 1844, Brigham Young signed himself in a letter as
> "Prest of the Church of L.D.S."76 Moreover, the manuscript minutes of
> the general conference on 7 April 1845, show that Brigham Young was
> unanimously voted upon and sustained "as the President of the Quorum
> of the Twelve Apostles to this Church and nation, and all nations, and
> also as the President of the whole Church of Latter Day Saints."77 In
> pursuance of this mandate, Brigham Young on 8 May 1845 wrote Wilford
> Woodruff, then in England, to obtain foreign copyrights to Church
> publications "in the name of Brigham Young, President of the Church of
> Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints," and on 15 August 1845, he gave
> identical instructions to others for the securing of U.S. copyrights
> to Church publications.

By early 1845, Bloody Brigham's power grab was complete through
pressures within his control and capitalization on forces outside his
control. It was soon after this in the Great Basin Mexico when Brigham
approached Wilford Woodruff and asked his counseling on whether a
separate presidency should be formed as presiding over the Quorum of
Apostles, which was eventually done, removing some power from the Quorum
of Apostles and consolidating it to the 3-man first presidency who
operated as an autonomous body above the control of the Apostles. The
Apostles from that time forward would become advisory to the presidency
instead of the presidency being 3 selected men within the Quorum of
Twelve having equal authority as the other 9 members.

The overall takeaway is that the current succession structure used by
the church has no solid foundation in scripture, just inferential basis
in a mishmash of a few cherry-picked scriptures and private statements
made by Joseph Smith, some of which were remembered long after his death
by people who were in leadership positions in the Utah church. Some
would claim that a few of those statements were fabricated out of whole
cloth to post-hoc justify Bloody Brigham's tenure as President, which is
a completely reasonable assessment.

The major point baked into the takeaway is that the succession process
of the Brighamite church today is directly counter to the scriptural
precedent the Book of Mormon, the Lectures on Faith, and the Pearl of
Great Price instruct of patrilineal succession. The Book of Mormon,
especially, is the most egregious example of the leadership of Brigham's
church willfully ignoring scripture to retain their own tenuous grasp on
power. Given the entire body of Mormon scripture and the basis for
Joseph Smith's theology, Joseph Smith III is the rightful successor and
the true holder of the keys to the kingdom.

Understandably, for a religion so focused on authority and the ethereal
concept of specific people holding keys given by biblical prophets and
apostles, the question of who holds the keys to the kingdom and thereby
the authority of the church, is a hotly disputed subject. It always has
been. Almost every fragment of the hundreds of factions of Mormonism
began with a dispute among leadership about who holds the keys.

So, now we move briefly to Quinn's second article up for discussion
today, Joseph Smith III's 1844 Blessing and the Mormons of Utah.

This is from the John Whitmer Journal Volume 1 of 1981 and the heading
is rather interesting.

> The discovery of the Thomas Bullock transcription of Joseph III's
> blessing by his father has created much discussion among Latter Day
> Saint historians. D. Michael Quinn had previously undertaken a major
> study of the succession issue \[\"The Mormon Succession Crisis of
> 1844\" BYU Studies, 16 \[Winter 197 6\], pp. 187-233\], and was asked
> by the editors of the JWHA Journal to prepare an article on the
> blessing\'s historical significance to the Mormons.
>
> Members of the Mormon Church headquartered in Salt Lake City may have
> reacted anywhere along the spectrum from sublime indifference to
> temporary discomforture to cold terror at the recently discovered
> blessing by Joseph Smith, Jr., to young Joseph on 17 January 1844, to
> \"be my successor to the Presidency of the High Priesthood: a Seer,
> and a Revelator, and a Prophet, unto the Church; which appointment
> belongeth to him by blessing, and also by right."

He continues by discussing the importance of the letter within the
context of rightful successorship we've discussed on the podcast so far
as well as the authenticity of the letter.

> The Mormon Church follows a line of succession from Joseph Smith, Jr.,
> completely different from that provided in this document. To
> understand the significance of the 1844 document in relation to the
> LDS Church and Mormon claims of presidential succession from Joseph
> Smith, Jr., one must recognize the authenticity and provenance of the
> document itself, the statements and actions by Joseph Smith about
> succession before 1844, the succession developments at Nauvoo after
> January 1844, and the nature of apostolic succession begun by Brigham
> Young and continued in the LDS Church today. All internal evidences
> concerning the manuscript blessing of Joseph Smith III, dated 17
> January 1844, give conclusive support to its authenticity.

Historical support for the authenticity of a document doesn't prove it
is, indeed, authentic. It merely creates the historical model with which
the document fits. Quinn continues:

> Even though Joseph had ordained four other men before 1844 to succeed
> him and had given the Quorum of Twelve administrative authority\[sic\]
> over the church equal to the First Presidency, it is obvious that
> Joseph Smith intended his son Joseph Smith III to one day become
> president of the LDS Church. A revelation to Joseph Smith, Jr., given
> a month after the birth of young Joseph on 6 November 1832 stated that
> the priesthood \"must needs remain through you and your lineage until
> the restoration of all things,\" and the revelation on priesthood and
> church officers of 19 January 1841 also stated \"even so I say unto my
> servant Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the nations of the earth
> be blessed.\" Prior to this, Joseph had already advanced to be general
> authorities in the church his father, his brothers Hyrum and William,
> his uncle John, his aunt\'s first cousin Amasa M. Lyman, his first
> cousin George A. Smith, and his acknowledged fourth cousin Willard
> Richards, fifth cousin Heber C. Kimball, and sixth cousins Brigham
> Young, Parley P. Pratt, and Orson Pratt. Joseph was making the Mormon
> hierarchy\[sic\] an extended family, and there can be no reasonable
> doubt that he had every intention of his son serving at the apex one
> day.

Nepotism in early Mormonism was one of the strongest-running themes of
the church. It was, indeed, the church of the Smith family and their
extended relatives. Quinn puts it so succinctly that "there can be no
reasonable doubt that \[Joseph\] had every intention of his son serving
at the apex one day." This is simply unequivocally true. Keep in mind,
Quinn was a BYU professor when he wrote this. He was employed by the
university run by the Brighamite church when this document surfaced that
the Brighamite church has absolutely no grounds for rightful succession
after the death of Joseph Smith. This blessing completely shatters any
pretense that any other church than the RLDS was to be the one true
church after Jo's death. Jo 3.0 was the person in Jo's mind all along
that would be the next prophet to lead this dispensation.

This entire Quinn 1981 article is absolutely remarkable and you'll find
a link to it in the show notes. His concluding paragraph summarizes the
complexity of the issue in a typical Quinn-esque forthright and
understandable way. He leaves his readers to make their own conclusions
and simply sticks with critical observations based on the data.

> There were many complexities and contradictions in the fourteen year
> ministry of Joseph Smith as president of the LDS Church. Not only did
> he establish competing claims of individual succession to his office
> at the same time, but (with reference to polygamy in particular)
> Joseph Smith\'s public statements were moving in opposite directions
> from his private ministry. Brigham Young resolved the inconsistencies
> by adhering to the private instructions Joseph Smith the Prophet gave
> him in the name of the Lord during the last years of his life, and by
> dismissing the public inconsistencies as diplomatic concealment.
> Joseph Smith III resolved the inconsistencies by adhering to the
> public instructions published by Joseph Smith\'s authority during his
> lifetime, and be dismissing the secret developments at Nauvoo as
> aberrations. Both positions required rationalization or denial of
> discordant elements of the past. Both the Mormons of Utah and the
> Saints of the Reorganization were loyal to their conceptions of Joseph
> Smith\'s prophetic office, and from their differing viewpoints the
> recently discovered 1844 blessing of Joseph Smith III verified either
> the tragedy of unfulfilled prophetic office or the glory of a martyr's
> heritage.

The only issue here is that the letter was a forgery by the infamous
Mark Hoffman. Hoffman made this blessing as one example within his
document forging empire and exhibited it to the world of Mormon history
as one of the greatest document finds in all of Mormon history of the
20^th^ century.

We discussed this near the end of part 2 of the 3-part series on Mark
Hoffman back in August and September of 2016 and it feels particularly
relevant because this is when the importance of this document fits into
the historical timeline and I'm recording this 34 years almost to the
day after Hofmann murdered 2 people to cover up his fraud. If you want
the Mark Hofmann story near the current anniversary of his most infamous
acts, consider going back to the podcast backlog and listening to that
3-part series, they're some of our highest downloaded episodes.

Hofmann knew how important this document was to the RLDS church. He also
knew the LDS church would want to buy this document for the purpose of
suppressing it as they'd done with many of his forgeries, so he pitted
the two religions against each other in hopes of getting the best bid
from one of the two and making off with a sweet exchange or a big bag of
money. Notably, in a rare moment, Hofmann recorded his phone call with
the RLDS archivist when he pitched her the blessing in exchange for a
nearly priceless artifact. I played this audio on the Mark Hofmann
episode \#2, but I'm going to play it again here. Fair warning, the
audio is just under 6 minutes and it's really terrible quality. Here's
the content of the phone call for those of you who skip it or need to
understand what you're about to hear. It begins with Mark introducing
himself to Madeline Brunson calling from Salt Lake City. Then he tells
Madeline that he came across an interesting manuscript and describes
what it is, the dating of it, where he found it among the Thomas Bullock
papers, and the analysis from then-church historian Dean Jessee. You can
hear Madeline Brunson's surprise. He then reads the content of the
blessing designating Joseph III as the rightful successor of the church
from generation to generation calling him to be "seer and revelator".
Then you hear Madeline say, "oh for heaven's sake" in reaction to the
content and you hear some of the Sunstone Audience laugh as that's where
this was played. You'll find a link in the show notes to the entire
presentation where this audio was played. After this you hear Madeline
asking about the pedigree of the document once Mark asks if she might be
interested in it. Then he drops the bomb, pun intended, of what he's
willing to exchange it for, a first-edition Book of Commandments, which
were trading for just shy of half a million dollars at this time. To put
that into today's money context, there's currently a trade being
facilitated among a couple of Mormon rare document collectors today
which includes David Whitmer's copy of the Book of Commandments he used
when writing his 1880s book "An Address to All Believers in Christ"
along with his most well-known seer stone. This package, along with a
few other loose documents is about to trade hands for \$5 mil. So, Mark
offering to trade the Jo 3.0 blessing for an original Book of
Commandments was quite the interesting proposition, which is why you'll
hear Madeline Brunson say "oh my" and sheepishly chuckle when he makes
the ask. The audio ends with him providing Brunson with his contact
info. So, it's about 6 minutes, feel free to skip it if you'd like as
you now know the contents of the call.

Hofmann audio

Hopefully, now you understand the importance of this Joseph III blessing
from his father just months before Jo's death. The existence of an
actual letter is still unknown. Maybe it exists locked away in some
vault, maybe in somebody's attic, maybe in a private collection, or
maybe it was destroyed or never recorded in the first place. The point
still remains, this blessing is the single greatest explicit claim to
succession the RLDS had and it's firmly rooted in the deepest theology
of the religion. The Bloody Brighamite tradition simply has no explicit
theological or scriptural basis for their claims to succession
authority.

Should a blessing come forward where Jo explicitly designated Jo 3.0 to
be the rightful successor, that would completely shatter any pretense to
authority and authenticity the majority of Mormon religions claim. The
possession of the keys to the kingdom of god in this dispensation had to
be passed from Peter James and John, then through Elijah, Moses, and
Aaron in the Kirtland temple to Joseph Smith and explicitly passed from
one person to the next to get to the leadership today. If there was ever
a break in the line of succession from Jo to Russell M. Nelson, the
whole system is illegitimate within the context of Mormon theology.

At the end of the day, Mark Hoffman was a genius for pitting these two
religions against each other with this forged blessing because it taps
into the very roots of what make Mormonism, Mormonism. This is something
which only matters to people who choose to place a value judgement on
the priesthood and literal descent, outsiders like yours truly can
simply sit back and laugh at the pretzels historians and apostles
twisted themselves into in order to explain away the conflicts arising
from patrilineal succession and what Bloody Brigham did. Mark Hofmann
was a genius because he created documents that were within the context
of the understood academic field of Mormon history. His forgeries
weren't fabricated out of whole cloth, that would give away the gag and
he wouldn't have made any money. What that really means is the
scholarship surrounding a blessing being given to Jo 3.0 from his father
designating Jo 3.0 to be the next prophet is rock solid, even if the
document itself was a forgery. That's why it passed as legitimate for 6
years before the extent of Hofmann's forgeries was understood.

This whole conversation begs the question of authority. What even is
authority and power in the Mormon context. I remember a presentation
given by Steve Shields at Sunstone last year where he ran through 7 of
the major schisms coming out of the crisis of 1844. In this presentation
he went through multiple letter exchanges from various church leaders of
various Mormon factions, most of which were calling into question the
power and authority by which the other had the right to be prophet and
president of their respective congregations. In the Q&A I got up and
asked something to the effect of where does the power and authority
actually come from and Steve's answer was that he didn't have an answer
but he looked forward to my paper on the subject. I laughed and thanked
him for taking my question, but there really is a fundamental question
at the root of my superficial question that couldn't be answered in a
10-minute Q&A and probably couldn't be answered ever.

The presentation and Steve's answer to my question have caused me to
think about this a lot. What is power and authority in Mormonism? I've
come to a few levels of understanding about it. First off, power is a
real thing and people in power have authority, and therefore control,
over parts of the world and groups of people whether we agree with or
abide by that power and authority or not. I believe the climate disaster
on the very short horizon is going to kill millions of people and
displace hundreds of millions, but certain people in power with
authority don't see that as an important issue or don't allow critical
voices on the subject to be heard in certain parts of the world. I don't
agree with their power and authority, but they have power over the lives
of billions of people so it doesn't matter what I do or don't agree
with.

Power equals influence. A person who can influence others has power over
them and that power extends beyond those they influence to spheres where
they don't have direct, but indirect, influence. From where does that
power and influence originate? That's a great question. Most often
people are born into a caste or society where they have more influence
and power based on their last name or the castle in which they live. In
Joseph Smith's case, he was one of those radical charismatics who
realized that the best way to be in charge is to take charge and
jealously guard that power once it's acquired.

Each and every one of these factions of Mormonism has power and
authority over the people who adhere to the specific system. They all
agree that keys of the priesthood and leadership in the religion are
important subjects, but simply disagree on the "most correct" system
they follow. It's the same end, but different ways to that end which
leads to different people with power and authority over different groups
because the individual structures are largely the same but the people
within those leadership strata are unique. These systems perpetuate
simply because people continue to adhere to them through tacit agreement
that their system of belief is superior to any other. My system gets me
to the most awesome heaven, all other systems be damned.

What stuns me about this story with the succession crisis and the Mark
Hofmann forgery is that, by in large, people didn't leave because of
Mark Hofmann Jo 3.0 blessing forger. It is such a niche subject of
Mormon history that only a few thousand people actually understood the
historical significance of the letter, and most of those people had
harmonized prickly historical issues long before this letter emerged.
Sure, somebody might read the Deseret News headline about the blessing
in 1981 and their faith might be shaken, maybe a few hundred left, maybe
even a few thousand. But, the impact this letter had was so negligible
when they had like 5 million people at the time; so what if a few
hundred or thousand leave. This letter and the whole Mark Hofmann issue
was a scandal of epic historical proportions. But the fact of the matter
is, when an institution which has no grounding in reality anyway reaches
a certain critical mass, it can weather any scandal. Joseph Smith
learned this during his ministry and the church knows it today. When
your system is built on lies, just lie until people no longer question
you.

Lane Wade email
