---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 181 – Green Mountain Masons'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-181-green-mountain-masons/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-181-green-mountain-masons
category: History
date: 2019-11-15 04:00:00 +0000
---

Ep 181 -- Green Mountain Masons

On this episode, times are tough in Nauvoo. From fights against the
anti-Mormons in Carthage to financial strain pressuring everybody in the
Kingdom on the Mississippi, Mormon leadership is looking for possible
solutions to increasing debt crushing Jo and the whole community. They
decided the Nauvoo Temple was the most financially viable solution to
return initial investment causes, which pushed all other city projects
back years. Joseph Smith decides to call on the Green Mountain Boys
militia to help the Nauvoo Legion in a campaign to make Missouri answer
for her crimes.

Check out the Smith-entheogen paper in Journal of Psychedelic Studies
here:\
<https://www.academia.edu/40786304/The_entheogenic_origins_of_Mormonism_A_working_hypothesis>

Links:

Letter to Green Mountain Boys\
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/IL/sign1844.htm>

Yelrom settlement\
<http://mormonhistoricsites.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/NJ11.1_Historic-Sites.pdf>

Isaac Morley\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/isaac-morley>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The work of building an empire is a vast undertaking requiring a lot of
resources. Joseph Smith was in the business of empire-building since day
one of his church organizing. By in large, the Mormon people stood
behind their divine leader in these empire undertakings. Jo was able to
successfully drain many of his followers of everything they owned for
the purpose of building up Zion. Theirs wasn't just a business
undertaking, but the greatest mission any group of people had ever been
commissioned to carry out in all of human history. The Mormons were
literally building the kingdom of God for Christ to reign from a throne
upon his second coming.

Constructing this Mormon empire had many moving parts and all required
lubrication in the form of money. Many Nauvoo public works projects had
been started without reaching completion to return the initial
investment. The Nauvoo canal project, the manufacturing district, the
shipping port on the Mississippi river, and a dozen other projects all
drained resources without ever giving back. But, there were other
projects which were moving along, but not quickly enough. One of the
main projects which was becoming an absolute black hole of Mormon
resources was the Nauvoo House.

The Nauvoo House association was formed in early 1841 by way of
revelation in order to create a place for boarding the Smith family and
entertaining powerful politicians and dignitaries when they would visit
the city. The Nauvoo House was to be the premier 4-star hotel experience
in all of Illinois and attract visitors and tourism from all across the
nation to come see what the industrious Mormon city was like. The Nauvoo
House would also be very helpful for people making a journey up or down
the Mississippi as Nauvoo was a great place to spend the night and trade
goods carried by the various steamers plowing up and down the river
year-round.

There was, however, a fatal flaw with the Nauvoo House. It was created
as a publicly traded association without any capital investment to get
it started. It was simply formed as part of the Nauvoo City Charter and
designated with a value and wealthy Mormons were expected to purchase
stock in the Nauvoo House in order to fund the construction; all with
the expectation it would be completed and they'd become wealthy in a few
years' time.

If the Nauvoo House was the only project the 10,000 Nauvoo Mormons were
working on, it may have worked out, but they had too few resources
spread too thin over too many projects meaning none were actually
completed.

By early 1844 it was necessary to form a triage list of the most
desperate projects. Would it be forming more market districts? Would it
be finally building a manufacturing plant on the Mississippi to create
goods and ship them up and down the river as was initially intended with
the location of the city? Would it be the canal to divert the unlimited
power of the Mississippi through the center of town and provide
mechanical power to all the hoped-for factories that were planned?

No... it was the Nauvoo temple. From a purely economical perspective, a
temple was an interesting proposition. The church today recognizes that
at the end of the day temples are investments. You build a temple and
require tithing income for locals to enter. Once the temple is complete,
hopefully a bunch of people renew their recommends, catch up on tithing,
and continue to pay tithing to continue having access to the temple. The
overhead for this investment is pretty low as no raw materials are
needed and the work is volunteer so a temple can be a cash cow. But, the
calculus which goes into constructing a temple today is a bit different
than the Nauvoo temple. When the church considers a location for a new
temple today, they look at the demographics of the prospective area. How
many people live in the area who actively attend church weekly, what's
the average household income of the neighborhood and surrounding city,
is there a plot of land which can be cheaply acquired yet still looks
desirable to have a temple sitting on, and a few other factors. At the
end of the day the result is retrenchment of the members near the temple
and increased tithing income. Maybe an occasional non-member goes to the
visitor's center and picks up a pamphlet, agrees to have missionaries
over, and gets baptized to be a new source of tithing income too.

The calculus which served at the genesis of the Nauvoo Temple were
similar, yet different. Nauvoo was the headquarters of the Mormon
population so they weren't really going to shop around to other possible
locations. There was only really one hill in Nauvoo so the location was
already decided for the leadership before they ever chose to break
ground. But, once again, the result at the end of the day was an
appealing one. Construct one building, take in a ton of tithing income
with very little overhead and no payroll expenses.

What this means is that the resolve of the leadership to prioritize the
temple over the dozens of other projects still in progress was a very
selfish choice. It benefited the leadership with greater tithing, but it
absolutely did nothing to improve the overall financial situation of the
average Mormons living in Nauvoo. With the temple done, understandably,
there was hope for expanded economic possibilities. Once the temple was
complete it would be a shining example to the outside world of the
Mormons' industriousness. Of course they must be a good religion, look
at how beautiful and white that huge building is! I better join up and
give them my tithing money too!

There were, however, disagreements about which project should be
prioritized. Jo wanted the Nauvoo House done, while the Quorum of
Apostles thought prioritizing the temple was the best economic and
religious option.

Robert Flanders' Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi page 189:

> At the annual conference in April, 1843, Smith complained that "there
> is no place in this city where men of wealth, character, and influence
> from abroad can go and repose themselves, and it is necessary we
> should have such a place... This is the most important matter for the
> time being... The Church must build it or abide the result of not
> obeying the commandment."... On April 24, 1843, Smith told the Twelve
> to "wake up the people to the importance of building the Nauvoo House,
> as there was a prejudice against it in favor of the Temple."...
>
> The prospects of the Nauvoo House were waning, however, despite the
> considerable energy which Smith exerted in its behalf. Its conception
> was too grand for the available resources. Finally work languished and
> then stopped altogether. In the summer of 1843, even the Prophet lost
> faith to the extent that he built a wing on his own house, the "Nauvoo
> Mansion," and opened it as a hotel. In February, 1844, Miller and
> Wight were asking to leave the project to go to Texas; and on March 7,
> Brigham Young, never as much interested in the hotel as he was in the
> Temple, urged the completion of the one and the abandonment of the
> other. In a sermon he said, "I expect that the Saints are so anxious
> to work \[on the Temple\], and so ready to do right, that God has
> whispered to the Prophet, 'Build the Temple, and let the Nauvoo House
> alone at the present.'"

The Quorum of Apostles, likely at the behest of Bloody Brigham, had
pushed Jo towards sending more resources the way of the temple. Jo
renewed his public calls for reinvigoration about the project by selling
it as the absolute greatest aspiration the city could attain.

p\. 191:

> Smith made it clear that the Nauvoo Temple was to be no ordinary
> meeting house but was to play an integral and indispensable role in
> new religious modes which were to come: "The temple of the Lord is in
> process of erection here," he wrote... "where the Saints will come to
> worship according to the order of His house and the powers of the Holy
> Priesthood, and will be so constructed as to enable all the functions
> of the Priesthood to be duly exercised, and where instructions from
> the Most High will be received and will go forth to distant lands."

What cannot be ignored here is the religious significance of the temple
as a place of worship. As Flanders said, this wasn't a church, this was
a temple where initiates were devoted to keep the deepest and darkest
secrets of what events transpired therein. There's something that
happens to the mind of a person when they walk into a large structure
like a temple that's devoted solely to spiritual pursuits. Walk into a
Mormon chapel and see how you feel and then walk into the dom cathedral
in Cologne, or the Cysteine Chapel. The feeling you get when entering
each of these buildings is far different than just any old church. The
grandiose size and awe-inducing workmanship which goes into the
buildings has a subconscious effect on the attendee and strike wonder in
the mind of the curious or believer while simultaneously striking fear
into the hearts of enemies of the faith. Those subconscious effects are
harnessed by the people building the temple and preaching within its
chambers, but with Mormon theology it runs much deeper.

What do I mean by that? Well, secrecy. Mormons will often say what goes
on in the temple is sacred not secret, but that's just a dodge to make
it not seem like a cult. The temple rituals are inherently secret and
until 1990 included swearing oaths of self-mutilation or consent to
being murdered for revealing the secrets. Initiates literally motion
slitting their own throats and disembowelment should they apostatize and
reveal what happens in that hallowed chamber. Think of how the mindset
this creates can be abused. The highest-ranks of Mormon leadership were
doing all sorts of seedy things from illegal adultery to sowing seeds of
treason against the United States by forming plans to commit a violent
coup against the powers that be. The secrecy of those meetings was kept
relatively tight-lipped when they were held in the upper floor of the
Red Brick Store or the Masonic meeting house, but if those meetings were
to transpire in a completed house of the lord with all the subconscious
effects at play that put an air of religious supremacy over anything
that happens during the meetings, it's much more likely that information
never gets leaked and more people in larger congregations can be trusted
with the deepest secrets of the kingdom.

For Joseph Smith and his religiopolitical practices, the temple was
exactly the tool he needed to ensure secrecy to his ever-expanding ranks
of closest devotees. To reiterate, secrecy is one of the primary
purposes of a Mormon temple and Jo wanted the Nauvoo temple completed so
he could run his criminal empire with impunity.

In accordance with this mindset, by January and February of 1844, Jo's
renewed devotion to completing the Temple project became a centerpiece
of his public sermons. He'd introduced the practices of baptisms for the
dead back in 1841 when his own father died and the Mormons loved it
because their non-believing family members could now be baptized
posthumously and receive exaltation. But, after hundreds of Mormons got
dunked in the Mississippi that summer and autumn for thousands of dead
relatives, Jo realized he could commodify dead people's salvation by
telling the Mormons that they would no longer be able to baptize for the
dead until the ordinances could be completed in the Nauvoo temple. This
became his bargaining chip to motivate the people to renew their efforts
on completing the temple. On a cold, rainy Sunday morning, the 20^th^
January, 1844, Jo stood in front of a large congregation of "several
thousand people" in "somewhat unpleasant" weather to reiterate just how
important the temple project was.

HoC 6:207

> When I consider the surrounding circumstances in which I am placed
> this day, standing in the open air with weak lungs, and somewhat out
> of health, I feel that I must have the prayers and faith of my
> brethren that God may strengthen me, and pour out his special
> blessings upon me, if you get much from me this day.
>
> There are many people assembled here today, and throughout this city,
> and from various parts of the world, who say that they have received
> to a certainty a portion of knowledge from God, by revelation, in the
> way that he has ordained and pointed out.
>
> I shall take the broad ground, then, that if we have, or can receive a
> portion of knowledge from God by immediate revelation; by the same
> source we can receive all knowledge. What shall I talk about today? I
> know what bro. Cahoon wants me to speak about; he wants me to speak
> about the coming of Elijah in the last days; I can see it in his eye:
> I will speak upon that subject, then.
>
> The Bible says, "I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming
> of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the
> hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children
> to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse."
>
> Now, the word *turn* here should be translated *bind,* or seal. But
> what is the object of this important mission, or how is it to be
> fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to
> come, the gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion
> built up, and the saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion.
>
> But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their
> temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth, and
> receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings,
> anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf
> of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them, that they may
> come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of
> glory with them, and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the
> fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which
> fulfills the mission of Elijah; and I would to God that this temple
> was now done, that we might go into it, and go to work and improve our
> time, and make use of the seals while they are on earth.
>
> The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and
> gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also,
> before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls
> upon the world.
>
> I would advise all Saints to go to with their might, and gather
> together all their living relatives to this place, that they may be
> sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day that the
> destroying angel goes forth; and if the whole church should go to with
> all their might to save their dead, seal their posterity, and gather
> their living friends, and spend none of their time in behalf of the
> world, they would hardly get through before night would come, when no
> man can work, and my only trouble at the present time is concerning
> ourselves, that the Saints will be divided, broken up and scattered,
> before we get our salvation secure; for there are so many fools in the
> world for the devil to operate upon, it gives him the advantage
> oftentimes.
>
> The question is frequently asked, "can we not be saved without going
> through all these ordinance, &c.?" I would answer, No, not the
> fullness of salvation. Jesus said, "there are many mansions in my
> Father's house, and I will go and prepare a place for you." *House*
> here named should have been translated kingdom; and any person who is
> exalted to the highest mansion, has to abide a celestial law, and the
> whole law too.
>
> But there has been a great difficulty in getting anything into the
> heads of this generation; it has been like splitting hemlock knots
> with a corn-dodger for a wedge, and a pumpkin for a beetle. Even the
> Saints are slow to understand.
>
> I have tried for a number of years to get the minds of the Saints
> prepared to receive the things of God, but we frequently see some of
> them, after suffering all they have for the work of God, will fly to
> pieces like glass, as soon as anything comes that is contrary to their
> traditions; they cannot stand the fire at all: how many will be able
> to abide a celestial law and go through, and receive their exaltation,
> I am unable to say; as many are called but few are chosen.

This was a call to bring more Mormons to Nauvoo or the surrounding
cities, give until it hurts, and get back to work on the temple. To be
clear, the system of tithing for the destitute Mormons at this point was
donating time. One in every ten days was to be given by every
able-bodied man for manual labor on the temple because so few people had
any money they could give to the project.

Desperation for money has been an underlying tension for every bit of
Nauvoo Mormon history. Well, Missouri Mormon history too... and Kirtland
Mormon history... And New York Mormon history... And for the Smith
family before the Book of Mormon was published now that I think about
it. But, that desperation was at a fever pitch in early 1844. Not only
was the city unable to meet the demands of unfinished public works
projects, but Jo himself was falling dangerously far behind on all his
own financial commitments. Not only was he unable to pay all the lands
speculation contracts he'd signed to settle Nauvoo and the Half-Breed
tract in Iowa, he couldn't even make the interest payments. His Red
Brick Store was a fitting name because it was constantly running in the
red. As trustee in trust of the church, he had too much property listed
at too high a price for it to sell without a directive from the
almighty.

Even Thomas Sharp in his Warsaw Message commented on Jo's land
speculation in the 17 January 1844 edition:

> It may not be generally known, that the Mormon Prophet is a great Land
> Speculator. The following, a standing advertisement in the Nauvoo
> Neighbor, will show how he operates upon the brethren in that line:
>
> Notice to Emigrants and Latter Day Saints Generally.
>
> I feel it my duty to say to the brethren generally, and especially
> those who are emigrating to this place, that there is in the hands of
> the Trustee in Trust, a large quantity of lands, both in the city and
> adjoining Townships in this county, which is for sale \-- some of
> which belongs to the church and is designed for the benefit of the
> poor, and also \[to\] liquidate debts owing by the church, for which
> the Trustee in Trust is responsible. Some also is land which has been
> consecrated for the building of the Temple, and some for the Nauvoo
> House.
>
> If the brethren who move in here and want an inheritance will buy
> their lands from the Trustee in Trust, they will thereby benefit the
> poor, the Temple and the Nauvoo House, and even then only be doing
> that which is their duty and which I know, by considerable experience,
> will be vastly for their benefit and satisfaction in the days to
> come\....

Notice to everybody, we have a ton of land that we need to sell to pay
debts. If you buy it, it'll be a great service to the poorest of the
Mormons and will be your benefit in the days to come... you know... when
the world ends and all it'll be nice to have a select plot in downtown
Nauvoo.

It wasn't just the unsold land. Signs were all over that the Mormon
pocketbook was feeling a little light in Jo's breast pocket. Jo relied
on an old friend who converted in the Kirtland era with significant
personal wealth, Ebenezer Robinson. Jo decided a quick way to alleviate
some debt would be to sell the Nauvoo Mansion and Red Brick Store to
Ebenezer Robinson while the printing establishment housing the Times &
Seasons and Nauvoo Neighbor will officially transferred to another
relatively wealthy Mormon, John Taylor, second prophet of the Brighamite
tradition.

HoC 6:208

> Monday \[Jan\] 22 -- \[William Clayton\] at President Joseph's
> commenced taking inventory of Goods, Groceries &c. for Joseph and
> settling with E\[benezer\] Robinson.
>
> Rainy; wind easterly; mud very deep. Rented the Nauvoo Mansion and
> stables to Ebenezer Robinson, for one thousand dollars per annum, and
> board for myself and family, and horses, reserving to myself three
> rooms in the house.
>
> Tuesday. 23.---E\[benezer\] Robinson took possession of the Nauvoo
> Mansion, to continue it as a public-house. W.W. Phelps, N\[ewel\] K.
> Whitney, and W\[illard\] Richards valued the printing office and lot
> at \$1,500, printing apparatus \$950, bindery \$112, foundry, \$270;
> total, \$2,382. I having sold the concern to John Taylor, who in
> consideration was to assume the responsibility of the Lawrence estate.

Jo had a lot of debt crushing him. He had filed for bankruptcy back in
1842 and was denied status because his affairs were too deeply
intertwined with church assets so there was no escape from the creditors
who were more and more insistent with every passing day. Jo was a paper
millionaire with his assets, but his liabilities outweighed his assets
by possibly as much as two to three times, a disparity which was only
growing with every passing month's interest piling on. He lived lavishly
but it was all fake. Everything he had was built on credit and almost
all of it was years overdue. He was taking out loans to pay off other
loans, building hotels and selling them off with his name on them in
order to make some kind of money. He probably ran casinos and he
certainly oversaw the affairs at the Nauvoo brothels and all his best
friends were as insanely corrupt as humanly possible. He's the perfect
president of the United States.

But, it wasn't just Jo himself who was coming under increased pressure
and looking for an out. The average Mormon was having a rough go of it
too as the Nauvoo Temple continued to suck the oxygen for community
growth out of the Mormon society chamber. The Quorum of Apostles drafted
a letter to a long-time font of community support for the church, the
Isaac Morley family.

The Morley family were some of the earliest members in Kirtland, Ohio.
It was the first experiment in Mormon communalism as per the Book of
Mormon, but only worked because they were practicing communalism with
Hingepin Sidney Rigdon as their pastor for years before the Book of
Mormon was a thing. Well, Isaac Morley was the leader of the Mormon
commune in Kirtland then dug up roots to move to Missouri as one of the
early Mormon settlements there. The Morley commune continued their
practices for half a decade in Missouri until the Missouri-Mormon war
chased all the Mormons out. When Isaac Morley and his fellow
communalists moved to Quincy during the exodus of 1839, they settled in
a small town between Quincy and Nauvoo which they called Yelrom...
Morley backwards... clever... Just like the Council of YTFIF. Mormon
have always been super creative with their nicknames, right NaMo family?
Yelrom was about 30 miles directly south of Nauvoo with Carthage and
Warsaw lying between the Yelrom and Nauvoo. With all the violence
brewing between Carthage and Nauvoo we discussed last week, the members
in Yelrom were beginning to feel isolated, which will be a major issue
in 1845 when the Illinois militia chose to march on the city of Yelrom
and burn it to the ground.

So, instead of providing solace and support from HQ, this letter sent by
the Quorum of Apostles, calls on the Morley settlement at Yelrom to send
provisions to Nauvoo to aid in the Temple construction.

> Beloved Brethren:\--While the work of the Lord is great and sought out
> by all them that have pleasure therein, the Lord of the vineyard has
> laid special charges upon some of his servants to execute; and while
> we are striving by all means to raise funds to hasten the Temple the
> approaching spring, we are not unmindful of the "history of the
> church," the "great proclamation to the kings of the earth," and the
> "memorials to Congress," &c., all of which are now before the church,
> though their progress is retarded for the want of the necessities of
> life, in the families of those who are employed in this business...
>
> we again call on you, as those who have ever been ready to listen to
> the wants of the church, that you would raise such collections of
> provisions, as you may have at your disposal, and forward the same
> *without delay*, to us for the special benefit of the clerks of
> President Smith or the church. Asking no more, it is right they should
> not go hungry or naked.
>
> Do you ask what is wanting? We answer, look to your own households,
> and say what it requires to make them comfortable, and you will know
> just what is wanting by these men. *Eatable of every kind*, and even
> soap to keep their hands clean, is scarce at Nauvoo, and it takes many
> lights to keep the pen in motion these long evenings...
>
> we are confident that when you are made acquainted with the facts, you
> will be unwilling that *Joseph* should *do all, and get all the
> blessing*. And as you shall continue your liberality in temporal
> things, God shall pour out upon your heads blessings spiritual and
> temporal---and *now* is the time for *action*.

Jo shouldn't be the only one getting ALL the blessings for his tireless
work to help the church. He wants to spread the blessings around by
spreading the work around. What a guy! We may laugh at it from our lens
but remember this is exactly how every single Mormon ward works today
without hiring anybody to run the buildings, balance the books, deal
with the nursery, or preach to the congregation.

Everything in January reeks of desperation. Add in to this a letter that
Jo sent to the Green Mountain Boys. The Green Mountain Boys were a
private militia that formed in the 1760s in what would become the
Vermont Republic. They were led by Ethan Allen during the revolutionary
war when they captured Fort Ticonderoga in May of 1775. They disbanded
but were mustered again for the War of 1812 and other little scuffles.
They became a recognized militia of Vermont and the Vermont National
Guard still uses the Green Mountain Boys flag.

Jo wanted the Green Mountain Boys to join forces with the Nauvoo Legion
to snuff out anti-Mormon violence in cities near Nauvoo. But, to a
deeper degree, what Jo really wanted was their support to make Missouri
pay for what Jo saw as the injustices of the Missouri-Mormon war and the
fallout of the Mormon exodus. Remember, Jo was dead to rights in
Missouri. The state government had him on arson, robbery, high treason,
and murder so he couldn't step foot in the state without his own militia
or he'd be arrested and hung. But, Jo was known to hold personal animus
toward Missouri for the remainder of his life while state authorities
from Illinois and Missouri repeatedly tried to arrest and extradite him
to Missouri to answer for his crimes. He thought that if he could just
burn the whole state to the ground, he wouldn't have to deal with the
Missouri problem any more. The Nauvoo Legion wasn't big enough yet to
wage a war without sustaining heavy casualties so he thought if the
Green Mountain Boys agreed to join forces to raze the state, he'd lose a
lot less of his own militia. This isn't Presidential, this is
tyrannical.

A few excerpts from his letter to the Green Mountain Boys. He begins by
appealing to the Vermont militia by telling them he's a Vermonter
himself.

> Like other honest citizens, I not only (when manhood came,) sought my
> own peace, prosperity, and happiness, but also the peace, prosperity,
> and happiness of my friends; and, with all the rights and realm before
> me, and the revelations of Jesus Christ to guide me into all truth, I
> had good reasons to enter into the blessings and privileges of an
> American citizen; \-- the rights of a Green Mountain Boy, unmolested,
> and enjoy life and religion according to the most virtuous and
> enlightened customs, rules, and etiquette of the nineteenth century.
> But, to the disgrace of the United States, it is not so. These rights
> and privileges, together with a large amount of property, have been
> wrested from me, and thousands of my friends, by lawless mobs in
> Missouri, supported by Executive authority; and the crime of
> plundering our property; and the unconstitutional and barbarous act of
> our expulsion; and even the inhumanity of murdering men, women, and
> children, have received the pass word of \"justifiable\" by
> legislative enactments, and the horrid deeds, doleful and disgraceful
> as they are, have been paid for by government.\
> \
> In vain have we sought for redress of grievances and a restoration to
> our rights in the Courts and Legislature of Missouri. In vain have we
> sought for our rights and the remuneration for our property in the
> Halls of Congress, and at the hands of the President. The only
> consolation yet experienced from these highest tribunals and mercy
> seats of our bleeding country is, that our cause is just, but the
> government has no power to redress us.

Never forget, Jo was banking on a payout from the federal government to
pay all his land speculation debts. Through 1839 he and the Quorum of
Apostles collected affidavits from the Mormons in Quincy and Commerce
about the recent Missouri-Mormon war to petition the U.S. Government for
redress. Their request for \$1.2 mn was denied by Congress and President
Van Buren himself. There are legitimate grievances for what the Mormons
went through but also don't forget that Jo is painting them as the
helpless martyrs of the outrages committed by a horrible and depraved
set of lawless anti-Mormons by downplaying any Mormon aggression. In
this letter, he's far more dishonest about the Mormons role in the war
then even Parley P. Pratt was when he wrote his propaganda rag History
of the Late Persecution Inflicted by the State of Missouri Upon the
Mormons in 1839, which he wrote from a jail cell. Sign up on
patreon.com/nakedmormonism to gain access to that entire audiobook with
my commentary.

Jo continues his appeal to the Green Mountain Boys.

> Our arms were forcibly taken from us by those Missouri marauders; and,
> in spite of every effort to have them returned, the State of Missouri
> still retains them; and the United States militia law, with this fact
> before the government, still compels us to military duty; and, for a
> lack of said arms, the law forces us to pay fines. As Shakespeare
> would say; \"thereby hangs a tale.\"\
> \
> Several hundred thousand dollars worth of land in Missouri was
> purchased at the U.S. Land Offices in that district of country: and
> the money without doubt, has been appropriated to strengthen the army
> and navy, or increase the power and glory of the nation in some other
> way; and notwithstanding Missouri has robbed and mobbed me and twelve
> or fifteen thousand innocent inhabitants murdered, and hundreds
> expelled, the residue, at the point of the bayonet, without law,
> contrary to the express language of the Constitution of the United
> States, and every State in the Union; and contrary to the custom and
> usage of civilized nations; and especially one holding up the
> motto: \"The asylum of the oppressed;\" yet the comfort we receive to
> raise our wounded bodies, and invigorate our troubled spirits, on
> account of such immense sacrifices of life, property, patience, and
> right; and as an equivalent for the enormous taxes we are compelled to
> pay to support the functionaries in a dignified manner, after we have
> petitioned and pleaded with tears and been showed like a caravan of
> foreign animals for the peculiar gratification of connoisseurs in
> humanity, that flare along in public life, like lamps upon lamp-posts,
> because they are better calculated for the schemes of the night than
> for the scenes of the day, is as President Van Buren said, your cause
> is just, but the government has no power to redress you!\
> \
> No wonder, after the Pharisee\'s prayer, the Publican smote his breast
> and said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner! What must the manacled
> nations think of freemen\'s rights in the land of liberty?

Then Jo digresses into Chaldean, Egyptian, Indian, Italian, Samaritian,
Syrian, German, and half a dozen other languages of absolute distress.
See, I'm a polymath just like you guys! I assume almost none of his
"translations" are accurate. He finally gets to the point.

> I am compelled to appeal to the honor and patriotism of my native
> State: to the clemency and valor of \"Green Mountain Boys;\" for,
> throughout the various periods of the world, whenever a nation,
> kingdom, state, family, or individual has received an insult or an
> injury from a superior force, (unless satisfaction was made,) it has
> been the custom to call in the aid of friends to assist in obtaining
> redress...
>
> With all these facts before me, and a pure desire to ameliorate the
> condition of the poor and unfortunate among men, and, if possible, to
> entice all men from evil to good, and with firm reliance that God will
> reward the just, I have been stimulated to call upon my native State,
> for a \"union of all honest men;\" and to appeal to the valor of the
> \"Green Mountain Boys\" by all honorable methods & means to assist me
> in obtaining justice from Missouri: not only for the property she has
> stolen and confiscated, the murders she has committed among my
> friends, and for our expulsion from the State, but also to humble and
> chastise, or abase her for the disgrace she has brought upon
> constitutional liberty, until she atones for her sins.

This is a declaration of war with a General of his own militia calling
upon another progressive New England militia to join forces and force
Missouri to "atone for her sins." This is like Russel Nelson today
calling on the California National Guard to help him invade Colorado and
take land east of the Rockies by military force. People today will try
to minimize the role of the Nauvoo Legion under Jo's leadership by
saying he never actually took them to active combat. Oh he wasn't
serious about running for president, he just did it for the good press
and as a symbolic protest. No. that completely misses Jo's real
intentions. Had the Green Mountain Boys responded to his plea, the
Nauvoo Legion could have successfully waged war against Missouri and
there would have been a second Missouri-Mormon war in American history
with hundreds or thousands of casualties. Don't ever let Jo's actions
here be minimized. He was a tyrant through and through and he would stop
at nothing.

> I appeal also to the fraternity of brethren, who are bound by kindred
> ties, to assist a brother in distress, in all cases where it can be
> done according to the rules of order, to extend the boon of
> benevolence and protection, in avenging the Lord of his enemies, as if
> a Solomon, a Hiram, a St. John, or a Washington raised his hands
> before a wondering world, and exclaimed: \-- \"My life for
> his!\" Light, liberty, and virtue forever!

This is a purely Masonic cry for help through print. Masonry is based
around Solomon's temple with the passion narrative of Hiram Abiff's
death, celebrating St. John's day as the Mormons did every year and
alluding to the first president of the U.S. who was a Freemason. Did Jo
give the Masonic cry for help during the Carthage shootout? Well he's
certainly giving it in print to another Masonic society to help him wage
war against Missouri.

> I bring this appeal before my native State, for the solemn reason that
> an injury has been done, and crimes have been committed, which a
> sovereign State, of the Federal compact, one of the great family
> of \"E pluribus unum,\" refuses to compensate, by consent of parties,
> rules of law, customs of nations, or in any other way. I bring it
> also, because the national Government has fallen short of affording
> the necessary relief as before stated, for want of power, leaving a
> large body of her own free citizens, whose wealth went freely into her
> treasury for lands, and whose gold and silver for taxes, still fills
> the pockets of her dignitaries \"in ermine and lace,\" defrauded,
> robbed, moved, plundered, ravished, driven, exiled, and banished from
> the \"Independent Republic of Missouri!\"

To clarify that point a little bit, the Mormons hadn't paid for their
lands. Very few of them had paid any actual coinage for the land they
settled in Jackson county, Missouri because they were using the
government program to settle newly stolen Native lands west of the
Mississippi. People could move to a land, settle and plant crops, then
pay the government for the land in 2 years. The Mormons hadn't actually
paid for their land when they were first removed in 1833. During the
1838 conflict some of the land had been paid for but the vast majority
of the Mormon settlements were on borrowed land they'd merely signed
contracts for. Had they been allowed to remain in Caldwell and Davies
counties for a few more years after 1838 they may have made some
significant payments to the government, but as it stood they had just
settled the land. Then, when they were removed from Missouri they made
claims that all that property had been stolen from them along with all
the money they'd paid the government, but the amount of land they'd
actually paid for was tiny in comparison to the amount of land they
actually inhabited. Sure, they'd built the homes themselves and planted
all the crops so it felt like it was their land, but what really matters
to the government and the state is what they actually hold contracts
for. So, when the Mormons compiled their folder of grievances to hand to
the federal government, it was really hard to verify what they tallied
up to make the \$1.2 mn because the state records didn't have anything
to corroborate their numbers. Also remember that \$400,000 of that \$1.2
mn was just boldly asserted by Jo and Hyrum Smith with absolutely no
documentation to base it on. My overall point, it's a lot more
complicated than Jo is making the case to the Green Mountain Boys for
because he was painting a picture that the Mormons were so terribly
persecuted which required never acknowledging any wrongdoing on his or
the Mormons' part.

> And in the appeal let me say; raise your towers, pile your monuments
> to the skies; build your steam frigates; spread yourselves far and
> wide, and open the iron eyes of your bulwarks by sea and land; and let
> the towering church steeples marshal the country like the \"dreadful
> splendor\" of an army with bayonets: but remember the destruction of
> Pharaoh and his hosts; remember the handwriting upon the wall, mene,
> mene, teke, upharsin; remember the angels visit to Sennacherib and the
> 185,000 Assyrians; remember the end of the Jews and Jerusalem, and
> remember the Lord Almighty will avenge the blood of his Saints that
> now crimsons the skirts of Missouri! Shall wisdom cry aloud, and her
> speech not be heard?\
> \
> Has the majesty of American liberty sunk into such vile servitude and
> oppression, that justice has fled? Have the glory and influence of a
> Washington, an Adams, a Jefferson, a Lafayette, and a host of others,
> forever departed, \-- and the wrath of a Cain, a Judas, and a Nero
> whirled forth in the heraldry of hell, to sprinkle our garments with
> blood; and lighten the darkness of midnight with the blaze of our
> dwellings? Where is the patriotism of \'76? Where is the virtue of our
> forefathers? and where is the sacred honor of freemen?\
> \
> Must we, because we believe in the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus
> Christ; the administration of angels, and the communion of the Holy
> Ghost, like the prophets and apostles of old, \-- must we be mobbed
> with impunity \-- be exiled from our habitations and property without
> remedy; murdered without mercy, \-- and government find the weapons,
> and pay the vagabonds for doing the jobs, and give them the plunder
> into the bargain? Must we, because we believe in enjoying the
> constitutional privilege and right of worshiping Almighty God
> according to the dictates of our own consciences; and because we
> believe in repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins; the gift
> of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; the resurrection of the
> dead; the millennium; the day of judgment; and the Book of Mormon as
> the history of the aborigines of this continent, \-- must we be
> expelled from the institutions of our country, the rights of
> citizenship, and the graves of our friends and brethren, and the
> government lock the gate of humanity, and shut the door of redress
> against us? \-- If so, farewell freedom; adieu to personal safety, and
> let the red hot wrath of an offended God purify the nation of such
> sinks of corruption! For that realm is hurrying to ruin where vice has
> the power to expel virtue.\
> \
> My Father, who stood several times in the battles of the American
> Revolution (when he was 5 years old?), till his companions in arms,
> had been shot dead, at his feet, was forced from his home in Far West,
> Missouri, by those civilized, or satanized savages, in the dreary
> season of winter, to seek a shelter in another State; and the
> vicissitudes and sufferings consequent to his flight brought his
> honored grey head to the grave, a few months after. And my youngest
> brother also, in the vigor and bloom of youth, from his great exposure
> and fatigue in endeavoring to assist his parents on their journey, (I
> and my brother Hyrum being in chains, in dungeons \-- where they tried
> to feed us on human flesh \-- in Missouri,) was likewise so
> debilitated that he found a premature grave shortly after my father.
> And my mother, too, though she yet lingers among us, from her extreme
> exposure in that dreadful tragedy, was filled with rheumatic
> affections and other diseases, which leave her no enjoyment of health.
> She is sinking in grief and pain, broken-hearted, from Missouri
> persecution.

Okay... that was a massive list of falsehoods. Joseph Sr., Big Daddy
Cheese, never served in the American Revolution. He died almost 2 years
after the exodus, not "a few months after". Sure, his health was
decreased by the winter exodus, but it wasn't a direct result. Don
Carlos Smith died because he was working in a dark and mildew-filled
basement churning out propaganda as editor of the Times & Seasons, not
because of anything he suffered during the exodus to Illinois. Either
that or he was poisoned for opposing polygamy and Jo married his wife a
few months later, the record isn't clear. And Lucy Mack was feeble at
this time but that wasn't because of the Mormon exodus, it was because
she was almost 60 years old living in the 1840s! Of course she was
feeble! Also, there's absolutely no evidence the Liberty jailors tried
to feed Jo and the other 5 men human flesh. That's a baseless assertion
made by Jo after the fact which pervades the story being told to this
day. But, the whole point of this letter is to weave a persecution
narrative and we can't let pesky facts get in the way or that would ruin
the whole thing.

> O death! wilt thou not give to every honest man, a heated dart to
> sting those wretches while they pollute the land? and O grave! wilt
> thou not open the trap door to the pit of ungodly men, that they may
> stumble in?\
> \
> I appeal to the Green Mountain Boys of my native State, to rise in the
> majesty of virtuous freemen, and by all honorable means help bring
> Missouri to the bar of justice. If there is one whisper from the
> spirit of an Ethen Allen, or a gleam from the shade of a Gen. Stark,
> let it mingle with our sense of honor and fire our bosoms for the
> cause of suffering innocence, \-- for the reputation of our disgraced
> country, and for the glory of God; and may all the earth bear me
> witness, if Missouri, blood-stained Missouri, \-- escapes the due
> merit of her crimes, the vengeance she so justly deserves \-- that
> Vermont is a hypocrite \-- a coward \-- and this nation the hot bed of
> political demagogues!

Help me or you're a bunch of cowards and hypocrites. That's a surefire
way to motivate people to risk their lives in a holy war.

> I make this appeal to the sons of liberty of my native State for help
> to frustrate the wicked design of sinful men; I make it to hush the
> violence of mobs; I make it to cope with the unhallowed influence of
> wicked men in high places; I make it to resent the insult and injury
> made to an innocent, unoffending people, by a lawless ruffian State; I
> make it to show our nation\'s escutcheon; I make it to show
> presidents, governors, and rulers, prudence; I make it to fill
> honorable men with discretion; I make it to teach senators wisdom; I
> make it to learn judges justice; I make it to point clergymen to the
> path of virtue; and I make it to turn the hearts of this nation to the
> truth and realities of pure and undefiled religion, that they may
> escape the perdition of ungodly men; and Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
> is my Great Counsellor.

Yep, there it is. Jo makes this appeal for his Mormon inquisition which
starts at the seat of anti-Mormonism, Missouri. I make it to turn the
hearts of this nation to the truth and realities of pure and undefiled
religion. I called it a holy war and people may find that an
overstatement or an alarmist reading of the passage, but that's exactly
what this is. Mormonism is the pure and undefiled religion and Jo's
great designs are to turn the hearts of the nation to it. The end of the
world as people of the 19^th^ century knew it was coming to an end, and
Joseph Smith was the harbinger to bring about the desolation necessary
to once and for ever build the kingdom of God.

> Wherefore let the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble, the
> poor and the needy; the bond and the free, both black and white, take
> heed to their ways, and cleave to the knowledge of God; and execute
> justice and judgment upon the earth in righteousness; and prepare to
> meet the judge of the quick and the dead, for the hour of his coming
> is nigh.
>
> As a friend of equal rights to all men, and a messenger of the
> everlasting gospel of Jesus Christ,\
> \
>          I have the honor to be,\
>              Your devoted servant,\
>                     JOSEPH SMITH.\
> \
>    Nauvoo, Ill., Dec., 1843.

Desperation and ambition play in the same sphere for a guy like Joseph
Smith. Everything we've discussed today reveals how desperate the Mormon
settlement was, but rational answers and a cooldown period weren't in
the cards because Jo was a parasite. He could only survive by feeding
and consuming more. He thrived in chaos. He dreamt of the day all his
previous scandals would be forgotten because he was ruler of the entire
world living under the iron first of his Mormon theocracy. You can't go
to prison and be hung for treason in Missouri if you're king of the
nation. People you owe money to suddenly stop knocking on your door when
it's guarded by armed Legionnaires. Who needs bankruptcy when the whole
world bows to your military and religious supremacy? Who's going to
throw you in jail when they have to fight through thousands of armed men
willing to die for you before they get the handcuffs on you? Simply put,
the only way Jo saw out of the mess he'd created was by moving forward
and never looking back. If he could keep expanding his power, building
his empire, and quashing any dissenting voices, he would end the day
victorious, wake up the next day and do it all again. Desperation
required Joseph Smith to never look back, ambition required him to
always look forward. But this isn't sustainable. This pace of chaos and
scandal can't be maintained. This is how most empires are built unless
the figurehead is removed from power before the construction process is
complete and that's what happened to Jo. He was in the empire business
and in the wild frontier of America in his day, business was good until
it wasn't anymore. Desperation and ambition drove him, yet desperation
and ambition damned him to an early grave.

Paper has received great response. Over 500 reads in the first week!

Molly Piper email

Comment about how the record listed them both as non-members, but both
died in Utah so that was a most likely a lie when the original documents
were filed in order to make it seem like the church wasn't protecting
its own and was simply carrying out the law.
