---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 186 - The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis pt.1
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-186-entheogenic-origins-mormonism-working-hypothesis-pt-1/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-186-the-entheogenic-origins-of-mormonism-a-working-hypothesis-pt1
libsyn_embed: 12475493

category: History
date: 2019-12-19 20:00:00 PST
---

Ep 186 – The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis pt.1

On this episode, we begin reading through the academic paper recently
published in a special edition of the Journal of Psychedelics Studies
authored by Robert Beckstead, Bryce Blankenagel, Cody Noconi, and
Michael Winkelman. This segment of the paper covers the background of
the Smith family, magic and 19<sup>th</sup>-century American occultism,
herbalism, medicine, Indigenous medicine, Free Masonry, and the
entheogenic influence in all these fields. It also discusses
psychedelics in the Word of Wisdom, the Book of Mormon, and early Mormon
sacramental rituals. The increased need for secrecy was realized by
Joseph Smith and the entheogenic practices became closed off to
non-initiates. Please send any feedback to <nakedmormonism@gmail.com>.
We’d love to hear anything you have to say about the paper.

Find the paper here:  
<https://www.academia.edu/40786304/The_entheogenic_origins_of_Mormonism_A_working_hypothesis>  
<https://akademiai.com/doi/pdf/10.1556/2054.2019.020>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

We’ve had a lot of people asking for this and the time has finally
arrived. Today we’re going to begin a series on psychedelics in early
Mormonism. A little background if you’re new to the show or haven’t
heard episodes on it in the past. Back in June of 2016, we discussed the
dedication of the Kirtland Temple and I spoke a bit about the
possibility that something was in the anointing oil which caused the
mass visions and ecstatic experiences. As soon as the episode aired, I
received an email from a guy named Cody Noconi.

> Hello,  
>   
> I am a permaculture designer specializing in micoremmediation and
> plant medicines. I believe I can help you hone your argument that
> Joseph Smith was using psychotropic plant medicines and potentially
> drugging his parishioners with them. I can provide new evidence for
> several entheogenic candidates, as well as confirmation that the Smith
> family had the ability and knowhow to do this. It is shockingly easy
> and efficient to extract medicinal compounds using wine or spirits. I
> can’t imagine how busy you are with everything, so for the sake of
> keeping this brief I wont go into more detail. This is a huge topic
> that I think deserves a lot more attention. If you are interested in
> discussing this further, I left my contact information below.

We got together, luckily Cody doesn’t live far from me, and that began
our collaborative efforts of studying psychedelics in early Mormonism.
From that time forward we began writing a paper which we self-published
and presented the following year at Sunstone in Salt Lake City, titled
Revelation Through Hallucination, a Treatise on the Smith-entheogen
Theory. The reception was fantastic. Helping us put together the
pamphlet was a previous Sunstone presentation titled Restoration and the
Sacred Mushroom, written and published in Sunstone Magazine by Dr.
Robert Beckstead in 2007. Fast forward another year and after reading
the paper, Robert contacted Cody and I to collaborate with him on an
updated version of the paper to be published in a peer-reviewed
Psychedelics journal. We gladly agreed and now over a year and a half
since that writing process began, the paper was published in a special
edition of the Journal of Psychedelic Studies. The reception, again, has
been fantastic so far.

Here’s the thing, it’s a long article. Most JPS articles max out at 15
pages but because ours was a special edition it’s just a shade under 50.
We had the good fortune of one of the journal’s editors, Michael
Winkelman, collaborating on the paper as well and the process was
wonderfully expedited and lenient with respect to the standard page
limitation. Because the paper is relatively long, we’re going to spend
the next few episodes going through it and I’ll add a small bit of
commentary, clarification, or further information where necessary. Why?
Well, reading Mormon history can be dry sometimes. There’s a barrier of
entry to understanding Mormon history academic papers and books because
the field builds upon itself. Not many will take the time to sit and
read an article, especially if it requires them to have 15 other
browsers open to research the information deeper. Listening to it read
by one of the authors is simply an easier way to consume the
information. It also helps that I’ll be traveling for this upcoming
holiday season, like I assume many of you will be as well, and reading
through this paper allows me to still get you content even while I’m out
of the studio.

But the most important reason I’m reading this paper to all of you great
listeners is because I need you. Look, I know y’all are smart,
skeptical, and you know your way around Mormon history because you’re
listening to this podcast and maybe you’ve read a couple of the main
books or even know more about Mormon history than me. We need feedback
on this paper. Y’all are far from objective evaluators of this
information because I’ve been priming you for a peer-reviewed article
like this for years now, but the more feedback we get the better. What’s
more, this paper takes a bit of a shotgun approach to the evidence and
candidate entheogens. We’ve included a lot of information that may
extend this theory beyond the weight the evidence can hold. We want to
scrub any untenable points from the theory and bolster that which is
strongest. It’s better to put forward your 3 best arguments instead of
your 10 good arguments. This paper is the 10 good arguments version of
the Smith-entheogen theory and we want it to start a discussion about
psychedelics in the field of Mormon history and a discussion about
Mormon history in the field of psychedelics. Thus, the subtitle of “A
working hypothesis” is best-fitting for the purpose this paper seeks to
fill.

Two more points to make. When I presented on this at John Whitmer
Historical Conference in September of this year, the primary feedback
from the historians in attendance was “show us your work”. Presenting on
psychedelics in early Mormonism is cool, talking about it on the podcast
is helpful to reach a broad audience, but until a peer-reviewed paper is
published, everything else amounts to just talking. Well, now we can
show our work. For images, tables, and footnotes, audio is admittedly a
tough medium so you’ll find a link to the full article in the show
notes.

Final point. Years ago I promised the listeners of this show I’d get you
a book on early Mormonism if you hired me full-time. When I made that
promise I had no idea what writing a history book required or the
process behind it. I feel bad about not keeping to the agreed-upon
timeline. Well, here’s its skeleton.

The entheogenic origins of Mormonism: A working hypothesis

\* ROBERT BECKSTEAD1 , BRYCE BLANKENAGEL2 , CODY NOCONI3 and MICHAEL
WINKELMAN4 \*\* 1 Retired, Department of Emergency Medicine, Pocatello,
ID, USA 2 Naked Mormonism Podcast, Seattle, WA, USA 3 Independent
Researcher, Portland, OR, USA 4 Retired, School of Human Evolution and
Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA (Received: March
19, 2019; accepted: June 8, 2019)

Historical documents relating to early Mormonism suggest that Joseph
Smith (1805–1844) employed entheogen-infused sacraments to fulfill his
promise that every Mormon convert would experience visions of God and
spiritual ecstasies. Early Mormon scriptures and Smith’s teachings
contain descriptions consistent with using entheogenic material.
Compiled descriptions of Joseph Smith’s earliest visions and early
Mormon convert visions reveal the internal symptomology and outward
bodily manifestations consistent with using an anticholinergic
entheogen. Due to embarrassing symptomology associated with these
manifestations, Smith sought for psychoactives with fewer associated
outward manifestations. The visionary period of early Mormonism fueled
by entheogens played a significant role in the spectacular rise of this
American-born religion. The death of Joseph Smith marked the end of
visionary Mormonism and the failure or refusal of his successor to
utilize entheogens as a part of religious worship. The implications of
an entheogenic origin of Mormonism may contribute to the broader
discussion of the major world religions with evidence of entheogen use
at their foundation and illustrate the value of entheogens in religious
experience.

Keywords: Joseph Smith, Mormonism, entheogen, psychedelic, spirituality

**INTRODUCTION**

The number and quality of spiritual experiences reported by participants
in early Mormonism (Welch & Carlson, 2005) far exceeded the daily
background frequency reported in today’s general population (Underwood,
2006, 2011). Multiple supernatural and naturalistic explanations have
been suggested to account for the sheer number of early Mormon visions
and ecstasies, including rational supernaturalism (Erying, 1989; Park,
2008; Widtsoe, 1915), out-of-body experiences (Bushman, 2006; Fillerup,
1996), animal magnetism or Mesmerism (Bunker & Bitton, 1975), prophetic
charisma (Foster, 2005), dissociation secondary to childhood trauma
(Morain, 1998), enthusiasm associated with the Second Great Awakening
(Staker, 2009, pp. 19–26; Taves, 1999), apparent materialization of the
sacred during trance (Taves, 2014), pious fraud (Vogel, 2004, p. vii),
and automatic writing (Dunn, 2002). However, no single explanation has
to date successfully accounted for the number and quality of visions in
early Mormonism. Nor can these modalities explain the “on-demand”
visions that were neither spontaneous nor the result of prolonged
austerities. To date, Joseph Smith’s and early Mormon converts’
visionary experience are neither easily defined nor understood
(Waterman, 1999). Against this background, we present compelling
evidence suggesting that many early Mormon visionary experiences were
facilitated by entheogenic substances that resulted in mood elevation
and heightened spiritual awareness among early Mormon converts.

Let’s take a minute to work with these terms briefly as they will
heavily play into the rest of the paper. Entheogen is a relatively fluid
definition. It was initially coined by psychedelics researchers in the
1970s to describe any plant which facilitates a specific type of altered
states of consciousness. Peyote, mushrooms, LSD, MDMA, salvia,
ayahuasca, and many others fall into this category. The 70s experienced
a moratorium on researching these psychoactive plants and the term
psychedelic in popular culture had departed from its previous clinical
definition, thus entheogen was coined. More modern psychedelic research
has reclaimed the term and entheogen has taken a broader definition.
Entheogen now refers largely to the practice in which psychedelics are
utilized to facilitate altered states of consciousness. Psychedelics can
be used in non-entheogenic contexts, during which they’re often referred
to as party drugs. An entheogenic session more often includes
meditation, sensory deprivation, administration of the psychedelic, and
programming of the trip both before and after the experience. Doing
mushrooms with friends and watching a funny movie is taking
psychedelics. Doing mushrooms after a period of fasting and meditation
with a babysitter, face mask to block the light, relaxing music, and a
debrief session afterwards is an entheogenic session in the modern
definition. However, things like prayer circles, meditation rings, drum
circles, sweat lodges, mystical dancing, specific types of breathwork,
tantric sex, and many other ritualistic practices can be used
entheogenically, usually utilizing psychoactive plant medicines as a
catalyst or facilitator of the session, but can also be done without the
psychedelic to achieve similar altered states of consciousness. Put
simply, this is the dose, set, and setting equation. Setting is the time
and place, set is the mindset with which you enter the entheogenic
setting, and dosage refers to the psychoactive plant medicine and the
amount ingested. Altered states of consciousness can be achieved through
set and setting alone, but dosage increases likelihood of success,
especially in large groups, and requires less precision with the set and
setting variables.

Let’s get into that term a bit as well, altered states of consciousness.
This can mean many things but has a very strict definition within
psychedelic and entheogen research. In broader psychology, altered
states of consciousness refers to any state of mind not within what we
call the Default Mode Network or Default State Network. Default mode
network is where your brain is when you’re thinking about what is going
on around you. When you daydream, recall a memory, feel an emotion, talk
about yourself, or are just “thinking” as we call it when our mind is
actively processing something, often based on external stimuli. Default
Mode Network is what we call feeling “normal,” even though that term is
pretty loaded in and of itself. Altered States of Consciousness disrupt
the default mode network. The analogy I use, informed by the book How to
Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan goes like this. When you’re just you
doing your you thing, your brain is transmitting information on
well-traveled highways of neural pathways. Our brains are wired for
efficiency and these pathways are like the canal system of neuronal
activity. Psychedelics flood the canals and completely alter the Default
Mode Network such that those commonly-used pathways are no longer how
the brain is interacting with itself. This is the altered state of
consciousness within the psychedelic field. These altered states of
consciousness facilitated by entheogenic practices utilizing
psychedelics facilitate what we call spiritual or mystical experiences
with a high degree of success and reliability. Obviously, the term
“spiritual experiences” or “mystical experiences” is quite loaded as
well but it refers to the internally-perceived experience of the
participant which can manifest in all sorts of incredible ways. From the
lowest of seeing meaning, connections, and supernatural phenomena where
none exist all the way to the highest transcendent spiritual and
mystical experiences of hallucinations, ego-dissolution, loss of
self-identity, and profound oneness with everything around the user.
Notably, an atheist, a faithful Christian, and a faithful Muslim will
experience similar spiritual phenomena when using similar substances in
similar entheogenic contexts, although their respective experience and
takeaways will largely be informed by their culture and faith tradition
or lack thereof and everybody’s threshold for achieving that state of
consciousness varies. These spiritual or mystical experiences can be
used therapeutically and some early research into treating depression,
PTSD, and other mental wellness issues is promising and is, indeed,
where these plant medicines got their start in the mid-1940s through the
early 1960s before their association with the anti-government
counter-culture, and the so-called hippie movement in general.

So, those are some definitions which will become very important to
contextualizing this paper. Let’s continue.

In this entheogenic working hypothesis of early Mormonism, we consider
the supernatural as natural (Taves, 2014; Winkelman & Baker, 2015) and
entheogens as medical therapy (Rucker, Jelen, Flynn, Frowde, & Young,
2016; Winkelman, 2001; Winkelman & Sessa, 2019). Because the two largest
factions of Mormonism have opened their libraries to everyone (Spencer,
2009) and “primary source materials are so abundant and available, far
more so than for more ancient religions” (Mason, 2015, p. 22), Mormonism
may provide insight into the role entheogens played in the early success
of traditional religions (see Richards, 2016; Winkelman, 2010, 2013).

**Visionary experience as veridical**

Converts who reported angelic visitations, ecstasies, and visions of God
in 19th-century Mormonism regarded their experiences as veridical and
not as imaginary constructs of the mind. The 19th-century publication,
The Essential Guide to Datura (“Essential,” n.d.), describes the
subjective visionary experience of datura intoxication as “widely
perceived to be real.” In reviewing firsthand reports of early Mormon
visionary experience, we find overlaps of these with contemporary
accounts of visions facilitated by entheogenic substances, and with
known symptomology associated with entheogenic use. Defenders and
critics of Mormonism may misunderstand this paper’s thesis as
questioning the validity of Mormonism’s founding visionary experiences.
Nothing could be further from the truth. All human experience and
insight emerge in the chemistry of the brain, including the achievements
of mathematics, science, epistemology, and even morality. To explore how
brain chemistry was involved in Joseph Smith’s religious experiences and
those of other early Mormon believers and whether entheogens facilitated
those experiences is not to question the spiritual validity and power of
those experiences but to illuminate how such compelling experiences were
accessed then and draw implications for how they may be accessed now. If
the preponderance of evidence leads to the conclusion that entheogens
facilitated many of Smith’s visionary experiences and those of many
early Mormon converts, then another oddity of the rise of Mormonism is
explainable, the dramatic decline in reported visionary experience after
Joseph Smith’s death.

**Entheogens as authentic mystical experience**

Clinical research with entheogens (psychedelics) indicates that while
they produce varying experiences, they also produce mystical experiences
indistinguishable from those produced by non-drug means (i.e., prolonged
meditation; see Griffiths, Hurwitz, Davis, Johnson, & Jesse, 2019;
Griffiths, Richards, McCann, & Jesse, 2006; Richards, 2016). A
double-blind study in the 1960s with students at the Harvard Divinity
School (Pahnke 1963, 1966) found those sessions facilitated by
psilocybin-reported experiences ranked, immediately and decades later,
as among the most profound and life-shaping spiritual experiences in
their lives (also see Doblin’s, 1991 follow-up study). Richards (2016)
reviewed this and other clinical research and examined their
implications for issues in religious studies. The profound and
undeniable implications of entheogens are their ability to produce
genuine mystical experiences that are phenomenologically
indistinguishable from the mystical experiences that result from devoted
spiritual practices or which occur spontaneously. The clinical research
establishes that it is pharmacology rather than personal expectation
alone that enables entheogens to produce the standard core mystical
features such as union with and intuitive knowledge of God, a sense of
transcendence of time and space, a connection with sacredness, a sense
of ineffability, and positive mood. This direct encounter with primal
religious and mystical experiences provoked by entheogens has profound
implications for religious studies in general (Smith, 2000, 2001), and
as we will show here, for our understanding of the sacred visionary
experience of early Mormonism.

**Context of Mormon entheogens**

Two salient characteristics of the early Mormon religion, founded by
Joseph Smith (Figure 1) in 1830, were: (a) converts who were “seekers”
whose “greatest hunger was for spiritual gifts like dreams, visions,
tongues, miracles, and spiritual raptures” (Bushman, 2005, p. 147); and
(b) converts who would sacrifice everything they possessed, even their
own lives, and those of their family, to gather together, establish
cities, and build temples to create a New Jerusalem, or Zion in America.
While new religions were prevalent in the 19th-century America, the zeal
with which Mormons defended their religion speaks to the charismatic
power of the founding prophet, a charisma which may have leveraged
entheogens for chemically induced spiritual awakening. We propose that
the entheogenic context of early Mormon involved sacraments, ordinances,
and endowments feeding these seekers’ hunger for primary religious
experience. Discovering their yearning could be satisfied in Mormonism,
seekers flocked to Joseph Smith (Figure 1), swelling Church membership
from a mere 6 in 1830 to 8,000 living in Nauvoo by 1844 rivaling Chicago
in population size (Hoyt, 1933, p. 50). Critical to the rise of convert
numbers that the Church experienced was that between 1830 and 1836,
seeker converts participating in Mormon rituals in which sacraments were
ingested or anointing oils applied, had the dreams, speaking in tongues,
miracles, and spiritual raptures they sought, with many enjoying visions
of God and Jesus Christ (Anderson, K. R., 1996, 2012; Petersen, 1975,
pp. 80–81). The experiences surrounding the dedication of the Kirtland
temple in 1836 have been called the Mormon Pentecost (Olmstead, 2000),
and had a similar impact on the rise of early Mormonism as the early
Christian Pentecost had on the rise of Christianity; both sects faced
the same charges of drug-related visions (see Acts 2:1–31, “KJV”).
Sectarian observers were appalled by the strange behaviors associated
with visionary sacrament meetings that Mormons had opened to the public.
Of this period, the Cleveland Harold & Gazette reported:

> *Large \[Mormon\] meetings, continued for successive days, were held –
> earnest preachings and alarming exhortations were given ::: swoons,
> trances, jerkings, and visions were frequent (“The Mormons,” 1839)*

A non-Mormon medically trained observer, James J. Moss who witnessed
several meetings concluded that the strange behaviors and visions were
produced by drinking “medicated” sacramental wine and contemplated
stealing a bottle “to see if it were drugged or not” (Moss, 1878).
Importantly, Moss, who was a believing Campbellite and had witnessed
Methodist enthusiasm during the same period, distinguished between
characteristic religious enthusiasm and sensational early Mormon
visionary experience. Although Joseph Smith was not present at these
meetings, he attended subsequent meetings where the sacrament produced
similar bodily manifestations (Bushman, 2005, pp. 156–157). In response
to the multiple complaints generated by the strange behaviors of Mormon
enthusiasts, Smith closed sacrament meetings to outside observers,
restricted attendance to male members only, added anointings with oil,
and began construction of a temple in Kirtland, Ohio. During the
dedication period of the Kirtland temple in early 1836, en mass visions
were once again reported by many of those who participated, with the
same accusations of drugged sacramental wine (see below). The evidence
for Joseph Smith’s use of entheogens explained in detail in this paper
is primarily based on six straightforward phenomena reported or observed
during the life of Joseph Smith.

1.  Entheogens were found in every area the Smith family resided, and
    produce visions, and spiritual ecstasies.  
    2\. Joseph Smith was mentored by individuals with experience in
    esoteric fields of knowledge.  
    3\. Visionary experience in early Mormonism was frequently
    “on-demand” rather than spontaneous.  
    4\. Joseph Smith devised a method to facilitate dramatic religious
    experience among his followers (Welch & Carlson, 2005).  
    5\. There was an association between early Mormon visionary
    experience and participation in Mormon ordinances where bread and
    wine were served, and oil anointings were received.  
    6\. Visionary experiences of the magnitude experienced during Joseph
    Smith’s life ceased at his death.

We find the best explanation for these phenomena is Joseph Smith’s
personal use of entheogens and his administration of entheogens to early
Mormon converts.

**Entheogens as the “means”**

In contrast to traditional Christianity, Smith consistently understood
matter and the body to be sacred, not profane. For Joseph Smith, the
physical did not impede the spiritual but was instead the route to the
spiritual. This unique aspect of Joseph Smith’s theology and prophetic
practice finds expression in his doctrine of “means.” In Smith’s
theology, divine action operates through the instrumentality of material
causes, including human action and natural law. The Book of Mormon
raises this idea to the status of a general law of divine action,
asserting: “The Lord God worketh through means” (Smith, 1830, p. 236,
emphasis added). Joseph Smith’s doctrine that God operates by “means”
and that the physical is a gateway to the spiritual provides a
theological rationale for using entheogenic herbs and fungi. In the view
of some prominent Mormons, entheogens are not prohibited by Joseph
Smith’s dietary “word of wisdom” (see below). Such entheogens would be
physical means God has provided for humankind to achieve spiritual ends.
Smith’s approach anticipated recent developments in the study of
religion, particularly the role physical process plays in religious
experience. In this, Smith seemed to anticipate Edward O. Wilson,
professor of biology at Harvard and one of the world’s leading experts
on biological diversity, who concluded that “we have come to the crucial
stage in the history of biology when religion itself is subject to the
explanations of the natural science” (Fuller, 2008, p. 4). Joseph Smith
likely understood that entheogens were a trigger for religious
experience, a fact vindicated when considering entheogens as simple
molecules cannot create the richness of early Mormon visions and
ecstasies without the human capacity for religious experience. Instead,
the religious experience is a product of the body through the actions of
endogenous and exogenous neurotransmitters on human cognition. Mormons
regularly modify their physical chemistry to promote spiritual
experience through the Mormon practice of monthly prayer and fasting,
but this is an unreliable method of inducing a transcendent spiritual
experience of the nature experienced at the foundation of Mormonism. In
Smith’s (1835) “the Word of Wisdom,” he overtly endorses the use of one
mind-altering substance for spiritual ends, wine in the sacrament of
communion (D\&C 89:5). The revelation further teaches that “all
wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the constitution, nature, and use
of man— every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season
thereof; all these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving” (D\&C
89:10-11). Adherence to the prohibition of addictive substances and the
use herbs carries the promise of “wisdom and great treasures of
knowledge, even hidden treasures” and protection from the “destroying
angel” (D\&C, 89:19-21). Herbs were a physical means to profound
religious experience, experiences that rarely occur without using
entheogens. As we discuss, evidence suggests that Smith gained knowledge
and skill in working with herbs (D\&C, 42:43; 59:17–18; 89:10–11;
Haller, 2000; Heinerman, 1975), including entheogens. Joseph Smith’s
grandson, Frederick M. Smith, came to the same conclusion as discussed
below. Joseph Smith was also a restorationist and advocated a unique
form of Native American “restoration” or “revival. From its title page
onward, The Book of Mormon advocated a “restoration” of Native temporal
and spiritual power and Smith sought alliances with Native Americans and
traded objects of spiritual significance with them. If Smith learned of
entheogens that bore the imprimatur of Native American shamanism, he
would have been likely to seek mentors in their use, not only for
himself but also for converts of his Church. Besides facilitating
religious visions and spiritual ecstasies, entheogens have remarkable
antidepressant properties, suggesting a motivation, possibly
unconscious, for their use by the Smith family and in early Mormonism.

Let’s dig in for a minute here because this will figure heavily into the
rest of the paper. Quinn’s book Early Mormonism and the Magic World View
is such an incredible resource, not only to illustrate the magical
practices of Joseph and the entire Smith family, but to describe the
mindset of many people in western culture at the time. Joseph’s magic
wasn’t something which was compartmentalized in his scrying with a magic
seer stone, magic and spiritualism was the way he understood the world
around him. Magic wasn’t a practice, it was a lens by which to see
reality. It wasn’t just in the prayers he spoke but the universe in
which he lived. If he woke up and stubbed his toe, had a stomach bug,
Emma was mad at him, got a bad letter in the mail, dealt with
accusations by a high-ranking member of church leadership and their
public defection, little Joseph threw a tantrum because of a fever, a
land contract fell through, and it was raining all day when he wanted to
preach at the town square, this wasn’t a string of bad luck, this was
punishment by gods or spirits who were displeased which happens often
this time of year when Mercury is in retrograde. To rectify these
punishments and atone for what he did last week it was necessary to
speak a specific prayer at a specific time of day with specific people
in specific places in the room while eating specific bread and drinking
specific wine in a very specific way using the correct hand. But how did
he know who were the right people? Set up a non-verbal system to confirm
they were also initiates in these esoteric rites… like handshakes or
something. A candle flickers, a unique flower sprouts in a special
place, he closes his eyes and opens his Bible and points to a specific
passage and reads it, all of these things happening around him happened
for a reason. That candle flickered because a spirit was responding to
something that was said in the room. That unique flower sprouted where
it did because something special lies beneath it. God directed his hands
to open to that page and point to that passage of the Bible because it
means something special and that’s how god communicates with His
messengers. This was far from a unique mindset of the day and Joseph
could find plenty of facebook groups and subreddits of people who think
like this today. What is truly amazing is that many users of
psychedelics maintain this same mindset about the plant medicines they
use for their own spiritual or mystical practices. The plants don’t just
have a verifiable and predictable effect on the person’s brain
chemistry, the plants connect them to what they call god. These herbs
are placed here by god to help us little humans view its mind and see
reality in a way that our Default Mode Network can never perceive.
Communicating the mentally-perceived attributes of these plants and
fungi is impossible. These experiences are ineffable whether by virtue
of existing before language or human language is only beginning to catch
up to what these experiences are. For many users, “god” is the only word
that comes to mind and even those three letters don’t do the experience
justice. For the user, the psychedelic used in the context of
entheogenic experiences opens up the world of mysteries the ancients
sought to unfold in their religious practices; the same mysteries that
built the pyramids, created society, builds symbols into stone edifices,
and pervades pop culture, all of which hides in plain sight but can only
be seen with initiated eyes once the scales have fallen. God talks to
users through the plants. This is the magical world view. While Quinn’s
book went so far in discussing and describing what the magic world view
was, it missed the entheogenic aspect which catalyzes the theophany so
often attendant before the magical world view is adhered to. It was
prevalent in western cultures which shaped the founder of Mormonism and
it’s alive and well to this day when people drive cars and post
photographs of galaxies millions of lightyears away on social media
using their smartphones. It truly is a remarkable world we humans have
created for ourselves.

**Wholesome herbs God hath ordained**

That Joseph Smith did not consider entheogens a problem is evident from
his attitudes toward herbs. Joseph Smith knew of herbs and their uses
and claimed the requisite knowledge and skill to devise and prescribe
herbal remedies for others (Heinerman, 1975). Joseph Smith’s development
into a village scryer or “seer” involved following the path set forward
in several esoteric traditions of the area he grew up, and possibly from
his interpretation of biblical passages indicating the ingestion of some
material preceding the visions of Ezekiel and John as discussed below.
In line with other health edicts of the 19th century, in 1835, Joseph
Smith delivered a revelation called “The Word of Wisdom” suggesting
dietary practices and the proper and improper use of alcohol, tobacco,
and other substances. However, Smith carved out an exception for plant
and herb medicine in the Word of Wisdom. *And again, verily I say unto
you, all wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the constitution, nature,
and use of man. Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the
season thereof. All these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving*
(Smith, 1835) The first “anti-Mormon” book, Mormonism Unvailed \[sic\]
by Eber D. Howe (1834), attributed the exemption carved out for
“herb\[s\] in the season thereof ” to Frederick G. Williams’ influence
on Joseph Smith (discussed below). Howe referenced Williams’ herbarium
on either side of his Kirtland home while disparaging his “communion
with spirits from other worlds.” Howe continues,

> *We are next told that every wholesome herb, God ordained for the use
> of man\!\! and we should infer that the writer or the recording angel
> had been inducted into the modern use of herbs, by the celebrated
> Doctor. F. G. Williams in Kirtland. F. G. Williams is a revised quack,
> well known in this vicinity, by his herbarium on either side of his
> house; but whether he claims protection by right of letters, patent
> from the General Government, or by communion with spirits from other
> worlds, we are not authorized to determine. (pp. 229–230)*

The Smith family exemption of entheogenic herbs as prohibited substances
in the Word of Wisdom seems generational considering that Joseph Jr.’s
grandson Frederick M. Smith, also a prophet to the Reorganized Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, carved out a similar exemption for
peyote as discussed below. We begin by examining the historical setting
of entheogenic practices of Joseph Smith Jr. and his ancestors, mentors,
and colleagues. We then summarize the evidence for the entheogens
available to Joseph Smith and his mentors, followed by descriptions of
early Mormon visions and ecstasies we correlate with a clinical syndrome
suggestive of intoxication with visionary anticholinergic substances.

**HISTORICAL SETTING: ANCESTORS, MENTORS, AND COLLEAGUES**

For Joseph Smith to fulfill his promise that every Mormon convert would
have visions of God and spiritual ecstasies, he needed assistance from
trusted associates who would covertly procure, process, store, and
administer entheogens. Several early church leaders (including the
Smiths, Cowdery, and Whitmer families in particular) were deeply
invested in the study of occult practices, and herbal, plant,
pharmaceutical, folk medicine /craft, and the utilization of “spirituous
liquors” (Brooke, 1996; Quinn, 1998).

**Salem witch trials**

The Smith family involvement with the magic world view and possibly
entheogenic material went back several generations. For instance, the
Smiths were involved with the witch trials in 17th century Salem,
Massachusetts, that may have been instigated by the psychedelic ergot
fungi (Claviceps purpurea). Samuel Smith, Joseph Smith’s great
grandfather, gave testimony in April 1692 that Mary Easty threatened him
after which he reported, “I received a little blow on my shoulder, and
the stone wall rattled very much” (Smith, 1692). After the Salem trials,
other generations of his ancestors resided in areas noted for beliefs
and practices of folk magic and alchemy (Quinn, 1998, p. 31). European
occultism also shaped the cultural milieu in which the witch trials
occurred. Mormon historian B. H. Roberts noted, *“Indeed it is scarcely
conceivable how one could live in New England \[in the 18th-19th
centuries\] and not have shared such beliefs”* (Quinn, 1998, p. 29). The
hypothesis of ergotism as the culprit in the Salem witch trials of 1692
(Caporael, 1976) is based on the signs of convulsive ergotism including
seeing apparitions, feeling pinpricks, pinches, burning sensations, and
by symptoms of urinary obstruction. However, those afflicted had none of
the constitutional symptoms or residual effects known to occur with
ergot poisoning (Woolf, 2000), making poisoning by ergot-infected rye
bread less likely. The manifest symptoms were attributed to potions made
by Tituba, a South American Arawak Indian or Caribbean enslaved person
(Albanese, 2005; Breslaw, 1996) owned by the Reverend Samuel Parris
(Dannaway, Piper, & Webster, 2006). Tituba was familiar with Hoodoo
religion (Martin, 2006) and plant medicines from her African heritage
and could have prepared an anticholinergic such as datura (Caporael,
1976). This could have produced the symptoms ascribed to Parris’
daughter, and her cousin, the first “bewitched” inhabitant of Salem,
whose behaviors, resembled the anticholinergic toxidromal (Holstege &
Borek, 2012) and dissociative features of Hallucinogen Persisting
Perception Disorder (Martin, 2006).

**Joseph Smith Sr.**

The founding prophet of Mormonism, Joseph Smith Jr., was born on ~~the~~
December 23, 1805 into a Christian family enmeshed in folk-magic and the
occult (Quinn, 1998). Joseph Smith’s father, along with his other sons
Alvin and Joseph Jr., engaged in the “more esoteric components of the
western New York religious-cultural situation” (Shipps, 1987). Joseph
Smith’s earliest mentor was his father, who we believe would have
communicated his entheogenic and magico-religious knowledge to his sons.

**Ginseng extraction**

Joseph Sr.’s knowledge of preparing plant extracts was recorded in 1811
when he collected and crystallized the 2018 equivalent of $57,000 worth
of ginseng root (Figure 2) intended for sale in China (Smith, L. M.,
1853, p. 49). Administration of ginseng root extract compares well with
Modafinil, a widely prescribed pharmaceutical drug used to treat
“excessive daytime sleepiness associated with narcolepsy or
shift-work” (Neale, Camfield, Reay, Stough, & Scholey, 2013). Having
crystallized and likely made use of this psychoactive themselves, the
Smith’s would have had no difficulty collecting, processing, and storing
more potent psychoactive plants and fungi for their medicinal and
magico-religious practices.

**Family magical practices**

Quinn (1998) has argued that the Smiths, who lived in Vermont, New
Hampshire, Upstate New York, and Northern Ohio, engaged several
magico-religious practitioners of which Luman Walters (discussed below)
played a significant role as mentor to both Joseph and his father (pp.
98–135). The Smith family, including Joseph Jr., possessed and employed
several magic-related artifacts including astrological charts, magical
parchments, a ceremonial dagger, an alchemical amulet, a silver Jupiter
talisman, and a cane that all “manifest direct indebtedness” to
occultists including Sibly, Scot, Agrippa, and Barrett (Quinn, 1998, p.
118). Quinn characterizes these occult books of “enormous significance”
to the Smith family especially Joseph Jr. whose cane was inscribed with
symbols from The Magus conveying the message: “Jupiter reigns
over-Joseph Smith” (Ibid). Shown in Figure 3 is the silver Jupiter
talisman also bearing the markings of Jupiter. Joseph Smith Jr.
possessed a Jupiter talisman, and a cane with a carved “serpent,” a
character in the Edenic allegory, and one animal believed to be
“governed by both Saturn and Jupiter;” this, Quinn argues, shows that
Smith relied on the works of occultists Francis Barrett and Heinrich
Cornelius Agrippa (Quinn, 1998, pp. 90–91). Agrippa (1486–1535) names
henbane, mandrake, and black poppy as three herbs “under the power of
Jupiter” (Agrippa, 1801). According to Barrett (1801, pp. 89–92),
henbane and black poppy are among the herbs used to invoke the “images
of spirits” through proper suffumigations involving hemlock, henbane,
black poppies, mandrake root, and other plants. Also, Joseph Smith
possessed an esoteric Amulet (Quinn, 1998, p. 93) that seems to bear
symbols belonging to both alchemy and masonry and representing Psilocybe
species mushroom, which we discuss below.

A brief point to make here. When it comes to manipulating plants,
whether that’s extraction, storage, reducing, infusing, whatever; the
practice is similar with many plants. A person who can crystallize
ginseng, like Joseph Sr., could utilize that same foundation of
knowledge to manipulate many other plants in similar ways. What does
that look like? For many plants you can just drop the roots, stalks,
seeds, fruiting bodies, or other parts into an alcoholic solvent of some
sort like wine or whiskey. Most medicines were delivered via alcohol.
Combinations of multiple plants obviously rendered each psychoactive or
medicinal profile of each of them into the mixture and many plant
chemicals interact with each other in unique ways. Those mixtures could
be administered in many ways like collyriums (eye drops), fuming or
suffimigation as it was called (smoking), drank, applied transdermally
as an oil or cream, inserted rectally or vaginally, mixed into an herbal
tea or boiled in a concoction, injected into the veins; basically any
way you could get the plant into you, people have been doing for a long
time. The invention of the syringe and pill capsule has revolutionized
medicine, but in the 19<sup>th</sup> century and for millennia before
people have been doing all sorts of interesting things to get plant
medicines in their bodies. The ability to render plants into a form they
could be consumed is a massive skillset with a healthy body of
literature and cultural knowledge passed orally through families and
entire demographics. Joseph Sr. crystallizing ginseng is merely a window
into a set of skills he’d likely cultivated for decades by gleaning it
from family members, mentors, and books. They also didn’t have the same
cultural prohibitions and perspectives we currently have on these
plants. What we view as a psychedelic drug today was just another plant
which required a certain expertise to find, harvest, utilize, and
consume in a specific way. Herbal knowledge was deeply infused in the
magical world view as all wholesome herbs god hath ordained. Some of
these plants stop pain, some of them cured infections, some of them were
poisonous, some allowed the user to perceive a plane of reality only
perceptible through the use of the specific plants. For us to believe
that the Smith family and their contemporary Americans had some
moratorium or prohibition on certain plants the way we do today is
presentism and is a flawed way to study history.

**The visions of Joseph Smith’s parents**

In 1853, Joseph Smith’s mother, Lucy Mack Smith, related several family
dreams in her book, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the Prophet,
and his progenitors for many Generations and from which we learn about
Joseph Smith’s life growing up in the magically and religiously charged
environments of sparsely populated New England and Upstate New York.

*Lucy’s first vision*

The golden Amanita muscaria could be the mushroom that best fits Lucy
Smith’s remarkable first vision. Lucy’s dream occurred c. 1802–1808, at
least 3 years before her husband’s two dreams in 1811 (described below)
and 12 years before her son’s first vision. Joseph Sr. had just informed
Lucy it was best for her to “desist” attending the Methodist church
because his father and older brother were very displeased. Lucy related
that

> *“after praying for some time ::: \[she\] fell asleep and had the
> following dream” in which she saw trees that “were very beautiful,
> they were well proportioned, and towered with majestic beauty to a
> great height ::: I saw one of them was surrounded with a bright belt,
> that shone like burnished gold, but far more brilliantly”* (Smith, J.,
> 1853, pp. 54–55).

A. muscaria occasionally forms “fairy rings” around the host tree
(Figure 4), and the color of a mature A. muscaria, as shown in Figure 5,
“takes on a metallic sheen ranging in color from red-orange to golden or
bronze” (Heinrich, 2002, p. 14), a feature enhanced by early morning or
evening light. Further, aging and drying converts ibotenic acid to the
more hallucinogenic and less toxic muscimol and “once completely dry,
the golden mushroom’s power is complete” (Heinrich, 2002, p. 170). A
golden A. muscaria surrounding its host tree may have been one of Lucy’s
waking memories and incorporated into this dream. Lucy’s dream ended
with her mood lightened as she concluded that her husband would share
her feelings, when “more advanced in life, would ::: rejoice therein;
and unto him would be added intelligence, happiness, glory, and
everlasting life” (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 56). Lucy’s dream included a
conscious memory of having seen a “burnished gold” ring probably of A.
muscaria. If Lucy deliberately tried this entheogenic fungus, she may
have done so as treatment for her lifelong depression (Groesbeck, 1988).

*Joseph Smith Sr.’s first vision*

Two dreams reported by Joseph Smith Sr. strongly suggest experience with
entheogens whose content contains not only allisions to entheogens but
also some familiarity with esoteric allegory and symbolism.

**Datura dream**

In what his wife described as his “first vision,” Joseph Sr. found
himself entirely alone, although accompanied by an “attendant spirit.”
In the “desolate field,” before him, Joseph Sr. saw only dead, fallen
timber, and heard only “deathlike silence.” Querying his attendant
spirit on the meaning of such desolation and dreariness, Joseph Sr. was
told that ahead he would find, “a certain log a box, the contents of
which, if you eat thereof, will make you wise.” Shortly after “tasting”
the contents, Joseph Sr. reports being threatened by “all manner of
beasts ::: bellowing ::: most terrifically.” In the panic, Joseph Sr.
escaped on the “fly,” and when he returned to his natural senses, Joseph
Sr. found himself “trembling.” Despite the frightful experience, Joseph
Sr. reported being “perfectly happy” (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 57). The
following datura experience posted online is impressive for its robust
emotional impact, the overlay of visionary material on everyday reality,
and the generation of a different reality.

> *You effectively keep your rational, sober mind along with your ego
> while on Datura; it’s rather that your sober mind is experiencing a
> completely different reality. Imagine normal sobriety but as you start
> to dream while awake. Rather than enlightenment through ego death, the
> nightshades offer dimensional travel to other planes of reality
> (deCypher, 2008)*

The frightening aspect of Smith’s dream suggests a waking experience
with datura fruit and his memory of the biblical warnings of death
(“thou shalt surely die”) associated with the “tree of knowledge of
good and evil” (Genesis 2:17), coupled with his awareness of reports of
fatalities associated with datura poisoning (e.g., Bigelow, 1817).
Smith’s guide echoes the serpent in Genesis 3:3, who advises that
eating of the fruit “will make you wise.” An element of Joseph Sr.’s
first dream reappears in his second dream, thorns. Significantly, thorns
are introduced into the world, according to Genesis 3:3, because of the
ingestion of the “forbidden fruit” of the tree, perhaps symbolically
referencing the thorny mature datura seedpod. What then, was the
knowledge that Joseph Sr. received from his spirit guide and his dreams?
According to his wife, following his two dreams, Joseph Sr. “seemed more
confirmed than ever, in the opinion that there was no order or class of
religionists that knew any more concerning the Kingdom of God, than
those of the world, or such as made no profession of religion whatever”
(Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 60).

**A. muscaria dream.**

The same year as the first dream, Joseph Sr. had a second
entheogen-related dream, which involved basking in ecstasy, the joy, and
love associated with the Edenic tree of life. In this dream, which he
related to his wife Lucy, a psychopomp leads Joseph Sr. to a tree with,

> *“beautiful branches spread themselves somewhat like an umbrella, and
> it bore a kind of fruit, in shape much like a chestnut bur, and as
> white as snow, or, if possible, whiter.” As he watched, the chestnut
> “shells commenced opening and shedding their particles, or the fruit
> which they contained, which was of dazzling whiteness.” When he
> partook of the fruit, he experienced something “delicious beyond
> description” and, inviting his family to eat, they “got down upon
> \[their\] knees, and scooped \[the fruit\] up, eating it by double
> handfuls” (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 85).*

In this dream, Joseph Sr. incorporates the spiny, thorny fruit of the
chestnut, a feature of the first dream, which is similar in appearance
to the fruit of datura. Instead of datura, however, the umbrella-shaped
fruit scooped from the ground in the second dream evokes images of
dazzling white spores dropping from the gills of an A. muscaria against
a bright background or on a black surface. Joseph Sr.’s esoteric
Christian A. muscaria dream concludes with Joseph Sr. explaining to his
wife, Lucy,

> *“I drew near and began to eat \[the fruit\] of it, and I found it
> delicious beyond description. As I was eating, I said in my heart, ‘I
> cannot eat this alone, I must bring my wife and children, that they
> may partake with me.’ I went and brought my family, which consisted of
> a wife and seven children, and we all commenced eating, and praising
> God for this blessing. We were exceedingly happy, insomuch that our
> joy could not easily be expressed” (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 85).*

**Emma Smith**

Emma Hale, Joseph’s wife, was gifted in using herbs. One of Emma’s
medicines was a healing salve that contained “jimson weed” or Datura
stramonium (Bailey, 1952) and when the Sauk Indians visited Nauvoo in
1841, she exchanged recipes for herbal medicines with the wife of Chief
Keokuk (Newell & Avery, 1994). In 1867, Emma wrote to her son, Joseph
Smith III: “I will tell you now how I make the salve. Of sweet elder
bark a good large handful after it is scraped, and as much gymson
\[jimson\] leaves and buds if they are green and tender enough to be
pounded up fine” (Bidamon, 1867; Youngreen, 2001, pp. 97, 119). Emma’s
grandchildren also reported her use of psychoactive medicinal beer,
ginseng, and lobelia, or “Indian tobacco” (Youngreen, 2001, pp. 73, 99).
Ginseng has stimulant, antidepressant, and aphrodisiac properties, while
lobelia (a hallucinogen and sedative) had entheogenic uses among Native
Americans (Alrashedy & Molina, 2016).

Datura is an interesting candidate in the discussion of early Mormon
psychedelics. Joseph Sr.’s dream certainly seems to describe it and
Emma’s healing salve explicitly describes the use of datura.
Contemporary herbal remedy books include datura with its many names as a
remedy for all sorts of things but all of them also caution against
liberal use as it causes catatonic states, sending persons into
convulsions before sending them to their graves. Modern trip reports of
datura are absolutely remarkable. The quote we featured from a person
using datura in 2008 is only a small window into the power the plant
holds. With many psychedelics, the user perceives a reality that can’t
possibly exist and knows they’re experiencing the effects. Walls will
shimmer, fractal patterns emerge, depth perception is altered, they’ll
look at their hands and lines and patterns form or their hands seem like
they aren’t attached anymore, all pretty standard. However, with datura,
the experience is completely different. The user can see and interact
with people that aren’t even there while nothing else in the environment
seems altered. Time loses all meaning and users frequently forget they
even took a dosage. One trip report I read on the patreon-exclusive
version of the John Whitmer presentation episode talked about somebody
watching whose line is it anyway while eating cereal for a while and
then realizing the tv wasn’t even on. Another sat around in their back
yard with a group of friends and conversed for hours while smoking
cannabis only to realize the friends weren’t even there. For people
believing in spirits and apparitions, datura is the perfect entheogen to
facilitate spirit conjuration within the magical and occult context. A
person will converse with an image of a spirit or deity when an observer
will just see the person writhing on the floor or mumbling while walking
around the room. Datura is a crazy drug and I would encourage listeners
to read a few trip reports to understand why it stands out as a
particularly shining candidate in the Smith-entheogen theory. It’s also
EVERYWHERE\! I found some on the side of the road in California and
different species of datura crop up all across the planet at different
times of year. Notably, 2 of the three primary psychoactive ingredients
are used in medicine today as an anesthetic and a transdermal patch for
seasickness.

**Native Americans**

Smith always lived close to Native Americans and likely was influenced
by shamanic activities. For instance, the Algonquin (Delaware, Fox,
Ojibwa, Potawatomi, Sauk) in the Northeast and Great Plains, the
Iroquois (Cayuga, Oneida, Onondaga, Seneca) in the northeast (Tooker &
Sturtevant, 1979, p. xviii) and the Cherokee in the southeast (Hamel &
Chiltoskey, 1975, p. 41) and their shamans resided close enough to
Joseph Smith that he would have been captivated by their religious and
medical practices. In 1822 Seneca Indian Chief, Red Jacket, nephew of
Chief Handsome Lake, spoke only miles from where Joseph Smith lived. Red
Jacket might have sparked 17-year-old Joseph Smith’s interest in Native
American culture and seeking a Native American shamanic mentoring
(Taylor, 2010). Joseph Smith demonstrated his interest in Native
American life at age 18 when he regaled his family with stories of
ancient Indian life (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 79), and later partially
built his prophetic career on a Native platform with The Book of Mormon.
Comparative religionist Åke V. Ström (1969) has demonstrated many
parallels of Joseph Smith’s teachings and practices with those of Native
religions of Northeastern North America, especially that of the
Algonquins. The parallels are extensive enough that Ström posits that
the boy Joseph may have been heavily influenced by an Algonquin
neighbor. Smith’s Native American influences may have included North
American entheogens, such as D. stramonium, A. muscaria, and Psilocybe
species. The Native Americans used entheogens in medical and spiritual
practices such as the Ojibway Midewiwin or Grand Medical Society. The
Ojibway (Anishinaabe people) in their legend of Miskwedo described the
use and effects of A. muscaria (Navet, 1988). We summarize here the
version told by medicine woman Keewaydinoquay Peschel (1979) where
Miskwedo, the redtopped mushrooms, the spiritual children of Grandmother
Cedar and Grandfather Birch. Two brothers came upon Miskwedo “turning
and revolving, buzzing and murmuring, singing a strange song of
happiness under a brilliantly sunny sky.” The older brother tried to
dissuade his younger brother from eating the mushroom, but defies his
brother and merged with the mushroom, becoming a Miskwedo himself.
Distraught, the older brother ran home to ask the medicine men what to
do; and he was told to return, locate the chief and the wisest Miskwedo,
and stick the quill of an eagle feather through each of their stipes to
stop them turning and singing songs of happiness, then to do the same to
his younger brother and carry him home. He followed the elder’s
instruction, and his younger brother turned back into his previous form.
However, after returning home, the older brother arose in the morning
“with his heart heavy with sadness and foreboding,” while his younger
brother “arose smiling each day, his heart filled with happiness, his
lips singing merriment.” The older brother became suspicious when, the
younger brother urinated more frequently and took longer than before.
When the older brother investigated, he found his younger brother with
“arms are open wide, spread like the umbrella of a mushroom” with
beautiful robes “glowing red, and tufts of white” singing with a “voice
of happiness” to the “people following him.” Now and forever, older
brothers are unhappy in contrast to the younger brothers who “drink the
Elixir of the Great Miskwedo” learning much of “the supernatural and
other knowledge” by drinking “the liquid Power of the Sun.” Together,
these stories transmit knowledge about A. muscaria, where to look for
it, how to recognize it, the joys it can bestow, and the displeasure of
authorities if consumed. For instance, these mushrooms are always
associated with trees such as cedar and birch and have red tops with
white tufts. The experience of ingesting these mushrooms includes
transient ego disillusion, unity with the Divine, and mood elevations.
The stories also warn of authoritarian displeasure, whom themselves
refuse filling their hearts with happiness, try to suppress its use. In
The Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith relates a similar story about Lehi’s
use of entheogens. Lehi comes upon a tree ladened with fruit that filled
his soul “with exceeding great joy.” However, others, whose dress was
“exceeding fine,” mocked, and pointed their fingers at those
“partaking of the fruit.” The scoffing caused some who ate from the
tree to feel ashamed and fall “away into forbidden paths” (Smith, J.,
1830, p. 20). Midewiwin shaman are believed to possess the power of a
long life, even “victory over death” through healing plants and the
rituals. Such power strongly suggests that among other herbal remedies,
the Midewiwin shaman utilized entheogenic material. Delaware
(Tantaquidgeon, 1972, p. 37) and Mohegan (Ibid, pp. 72, 128) peoples
were familiar with datura. Native Americans living in Virginia gave a
psychoactive brew called “wysoccan” to their young men during a rite of
passage, causing a “derangement for 20 days,” strongly suggesting it
contained D. stramonium (Schultes, 1975, 9, 142) or A. muscaria (Geraty,
2015). Most North American Eastern Woodland Indian groups reported:
“datura as the base of a narcotic drink used in manhood initiation
rites” (Goodman, 1993). In 1705, Virginian Indians were reported to have
been using datura in their religious ceremonies (Safford, 1922) and
there was widespread use of datura in initiation ceremonies in Native
North America (Jacobs, 1996). Further, sometimes, Eastern Native
Americans would add “datura and other powerful substances ::: to tobacco
to prepare a particularly potent smoke” (Fuller, 2008, p. 81). Growing
up and into adulthood, Smith lived relatively near to the Algonquin
areas of the Potawatomi, Ojibwa, and Delaware peoples whom all belonged
to the Algonquin family. We will explore Smith’s relationships with this
group of peoples when we discuss his transactions with the Potawatomi in
the early 1840s Nauvoo. However, it is enough to note that Smith likely
noted the secretive Midewiwin medical society with its selective
membership, graded training of new shamans, and their use psychoactive
materials including datura and A. muscaria.

**Esoteric Christianity**

Joseph Smith was influenced at a young age by several categories of
esotericism, including esoteric Christianity, spiritual alchemy, and
speculative freemasonry (Owens, 1999). Significantly, some members of
these esoteric schools of thought had an interest in entheogen use and
encoded their knowledge in esoteric works of art. During the 13th
century, esoteric Christian artists painted Biblical themes associated
with entheogenic mushrooms (Brown & Brown, 2016; also see Brown & Brown
in this issue). For instance, in Figure 6 is an “Eden Panel” found in
Saint Michael’s Church, Germany (1240 CE) showing Adam and Eve standing,
and a serpent coiled on a tree in front of a spotted A. muscaria
mushroom cap. Also, in Figure 7, the Edenic tree also takes on the form
of an A. muscaria in a ca. 1291 fresco found in Plaincourault Abbey,
Indre, France. Figure 8 shows a painting by the Flemish artist, Petrus
Christus (c. 1410–1475) portraying the child Christ laying supine on an
A. muscaria bed looked over by Joseph, Mary, and winged angels. The
relative abundance of Christian A. muscaria syncretic art led Antonio
Escohotado (2012) to conclude, “it seems indisputable that there is a
connection between visionary mushrooms and Christianity” (p. 73). There
are reasons to think that given his esoteric background, Joseph Smith or
one of his mentors had access to this art, decrypted it, and then
encoded in Smith’s teachings, revelations, and ordinances. Where then
did Joseph Smith first learn of alchemy and esoteric Christianity? In
his book, Magic Mushrooms in Religion and Alchemy, Heinrich (2002, pp.
105–153) discusses the relationship between esoteric Christianity and
using A. muscaria as a sacramental meal. According to Heinrich, Jesus
unmistakably identifies himself with an entheogenic substance, an elixir
of life and bread of heaven, the A. muscaria mushroom shown in Figure 9.
Heinrich quotes Jesus telling a woman,

> *…whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
> thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of
> water springing up into everlasting life. (p. 120)*

The “living water,” according to Heinrich, is water-soluble muscimol,
the principle psychoactive in A. muscaria. Muscimol is excreted
unchanged in the urine, which the shaman or others can consume.
Supporting Heinrich’s argument of entheogenic urine, we note Jesus’s
saying in John 7:8,

> *He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly
> shall flow rivers of living water.*

The phrase “out of \[Jesus’\] belly” may describe entheogenic-laced
urine. Due to physiological processes, urine after ingesting A. muscaria
is more potent than the tea initially consumed. The entheogenic
component of A. muscaria is water-soluble, and when extracted with
water, turns the water the color of red wine. Further, the mushrooms
upturned cap (Figure 9) and becomes the cup holding the elixir of life,
and the mushroom itself becomes the life-giving bread. Heinrich (2002,
p. 122) quotes Jesus telling he disciples:

> *I am the living bread that has come down from heaven. Anyone who eats
> this bread will live forever; and the bread that I shall give is my
> flesh ::: if you do not eat \[my\] flesh and drink \[my\] blood, you
> will not have life in you. Anyone who does eat my flesh and drink my
> blood has eternal life ::: for my flesh is real food and my blood is
> real drink ::: As I, who am sent by the living Father, myself draw
> life from the Father, so whoever eats me will draw life from me. This
> is the bread come down from heaven ::: anyone who eats this bread will
> live forever. (p. 121)*

Implied in Heinrich’s discussion of these passages is his confidence
that anyone using entheogens in a Christian context will experience
“many of the states described ::: in mystical Christianity” (p. 5).
Although most of Smith’s revelations and teachings suggest the
traditional Christian understandings of Jesus, occasionally he betrayed
a different view. For instance, in 1844, Smith is reported to have said,

> *I am the only man that has ever been able to keep a whole church
> together since the days of Adam ::: Neither Paul, John, Peter, nor
> Jesus ever did it ::: The followers of Jesus ran away from Him; but
> the Latter-day Saints never ran away from me yet. (Roberts, 1915, pp.
> 408–409)*

In this statement, Smith seems to suggest that Jesus did not differ from
him – meaning that Smith understood Jesus as shaman-like, as a human and
not a God. Likewise, Jesus-like Smith healed the “lame arm” of Mrs. John
Johnson (Dahl & Cannon, 1997) and raised William Hungtington from the
dead (Curtis, 1892).

*Spiritual alchemy*

Owens (1999) argues that Joseph Smith “certainly \[learned\]. . . about
the Philosopher’s Stone and alchemy’s transmutational mystery” (p. 158).
Alchemy became a subject of several artists in Europe. Owens argues that
Smith likely learned about alchemy from “a physician named Luman
Walter(s), who was a distant cousin of Smith’s future wife and a member
of the circle associated with the early treasure quests” (p. 16) of
which young Joseph was a member. Agreeing with Owens, D. Michael Quinn
reasons that Walters was Smith’s teenage mentor and occult advisor
(1998, pp. 116–122). In his book, Science, Alchemy and the Great Plague
of London William S. Shelley (2017) stated “that alchemical writings
concerned chemical processes from their late antique beginning until the
Renaissance. Spiritual alchemy originated, it would appear, in the early
sixteenth century when Paracelsus \[1493–1541\] blended his medical
practice of alchemy with his interest in the Hermetic-Platonic tradition
of Renaissance esotericism” (p. 4). Sometime late in the reign of Queen
Elizabethan (1533–1603), alchemical texts “seem to be exclusively
spiritual, that is, that have no apparent interest in practical
laboratory procedures” (Ibid). English alchemists such as Elisa Ashmole
(1617–1692) and Robert Boyle (1627–1691), according to Shelley, “were
concerned with one or more substances, termed the red stone, the angelic
stone, and otherwise, whose effects were described as spiritual.”
Shelley then argues, “these are substances that produced mystical
experiences and was implicitly psychoactive” and associates it with “the
motif of \[Israelite\] manna, ::: the hidden manna of Revelation 2:17,
::: \[the\] hermetic tradition, ::: English alchemical literature from
the Tudor period onward,” and in “the twelfth century theology of the
school of Laon \[northern France\], afterward spreading to Cistercian,
Franciscan, and other writers” (Ibid). Heinrich (2002) explores the
connection between alchemy and entheogens, including the allegorical use
of the Rebis such as the one in Figure 10 to transmit privileged
knowledge of entheogenic A. muscaria (pp. 172–177, 184). The Rebis is a
double-headed hermaphrodite linked to the prima materia, philosophers
stone, an elixir of life within the allegory, A. muscaria. According to
Lewis Spence (1920, p. 10), one of the “grand objects of alchemy” was
the discovery of an elixir to ensure health and prevent death, “elixirs
of life” containing herbs and medicinals that Heinrich argues are
entheogens. We now examine an amulet in Figure 11 belonging to Joseph
Smith and gifted to Eliza R. Snow, his most esoteric plural wife. Figure
12 shows an inverted mushroom species (presumably Psilocybin) comparing
favorably to the mushroom-appearing tassels dangling from both the belt
worn by the Rebis in Figure 13 and the belt engraved on Joseph Smith’s
amulet in Figure 14. It is reasonable to propose that Figures 11 and 13
represent the same thing, Psilocybe species mushrooms.

*Speculative Masonry*

Mormon historian and former director of the Institute of Religion in
Salt Lake City, Reid C. Durham documented Joseph Smith’s Masonic
heritage and his adoption of Masonic ritual and iconography found in the
Mormon Nauvoo temple endowment (Durham, 1974). The Nauvoo Masonic Lodge,
founded at the end of 1839, anticipated the spring of 1842
groundbreaking of the Nauvoo temple. Joseph Smith’s father and older
brother, Joseph Sr. and Hyrum, respectively, were both Masons, and
Joseph Jr. was likely familiar with Captain William Morgan, famously
murdered for publishing the secrets of Masonry in 1826. After Morgan’s
death, his widow, Lucinda Morgan, secretly became one of Smith’s 33
known plural wives in 1838 (Compton, 1997). Early Mormon leaders and
successors to Joseph Smith, including Brigham Young, the leader of
Mormonism’s most successful schism, were deeply involved in Masonry
before their conversion to Mormonism (Durham, 1974; Tanner, n.d.). There
were masonic motifs, architecture, ritual, and iconography in the
Nauvoo, Illinois temple. For example, on the outside architecture of the
temple were the masonic sunstones, upside-down fivepointed star stones,
moonstones, and a masonic compass and a square weathervane. Inside the
temple, the masonic “all-searching eye” was shown on the original
architect’s drawing (Stack, 2002). Joseph’s mother, Lucy Smith
(Anderson, 2001, p. 23; also see Joseph Smith Papers, 1844–1845)
revealed how “for a season that we stopped our labor and went trying to
win the faculty of Abrac,” a secret masonic process with roots in much
older traditions. Mormon scholar and historian Michael Quinn (1998)
reports that the

> *Faculty of Abrac was a well-known phrase linking magic and divinity.
> Medieval and early modern magic manuscripts in England used “Abrac”
> and “Abraca” as one of the names of God in conjurations. \[And that\]
> “Abraxas \[was a\] Gnostic name for God that had become associated
> with magic.” (pp. 68–67)*

In America, as in Europe, speculative masonry subsumed many mysteries in
the ancient world (Casey & Gutierrez 2005, p. 222). There is evidence to
suggest that these mysteries utilized entheogens including the Greek
Eleusinian mysteries (Wasson, Ruck, & Hofmann, 2008, pp. 2–7), the
Demeter-Persephone cult (Ibid, pp. 12–15), and the Dionysiac mystery
cults (Ibid, pp. 15–18). The Roman Phrygian rites for Magna Mater
(Drummond, 2013, p. 46), the Mithraic cults of Persia (Ezdejini, 2016),
and the mysteries surrounding the Egyptian gods Osiris and Isis
(Berlant, 2005) are all suspected of entheogen use in their rites.
According to Chris Bennett (2018), the *“imagery of the \[Masonic\]
Lodge, was built with a set and setting that in many ways could be
enhanced by the use of entheogens”* (p. 681) and the idea that some
“masonic drinks may be a remnant of early sacramental potions that
contained psychoactive ingredients ::: \[has\] been pondered for well
over a century” (p. 693). For instance, Bennett quotes from an 1835
Masonic history by John Fellows who in rehearsing the entheogens of
Ancient Egyptians, Pythagoreans, and Druids, “refers to a soporific cake
of honey and medicated grain medicatis frugibus \[i.e. drugged\]) along
with preparations of poppy and other psychoactive substances \[with
fellow Mason as\] its target audience” (Ibid). Bennett then notes
Fellow’s informing the candidate that in drinking the potion offered
to him during initiation, it is a eucharist by which “the real presence
of the Saviour is manifest” (Ibid). In his book, Alchemically Stoned,
the 33rd degree Mason P. D. Newman (2017) argues that features of
Masonic ceremonies, architecture, and accouterments strongly suggest
some Masonic lodges used entheogenic material from Acacia species known
to contain the psychedelic dimethyltryptamine (DMT). Shannon (2008) and
Nemu (2019; Editor’s Note: see Nemu’s article here) similarly argue for
the Hebraic use of the entheogenic Acacia tree. According to Mormon
writer Jeffrey Bradshaw (2015), “In the ceremonies of the Royal Arch
Degree of the York rite, candidates pass through a series of veils and
eventually enter into the divine presence” (p. 162), but in the Nauvoo
temple endowment, it “is not a mere representation but is the reality of
coming into a heavenly presence” (p. 218). Mormon historian Andrew Ehat
(1994) explains, “In temples, we have a staged representation of the
step-by-step ascent into the presence of the Eternal while we are yet
alive ::: \[and\] “there should have been a change in us as there
certainly was with Moses when he was caught up to celestial realms and
saw and heard things unlawful to utter” (pp. 53–54, emphasis added). We
argue that the “change” required to be “caught up to celestial realms”
required the administration of an entheogen, a change that, like in
Kirtland, would produce observable symptomatology. If this hypothesis is
correct, an entheogenic endowment may have been the source of Smith’s
confidence that converts would in “reality” be “caught up to celestial
realms.” The secret that Smith needed converts to keep was the visible
symptomology they would observe during the Nauvoo temple endowment.

**Policy of secrecy**

In an 1841 meeting, Joseph Smith explained a purpose of the lodge is to
learn to keep secrets. Smith explained, “the reason we do not have the
secrets of the Lord revealed unto us is because we do not keep them”
(Roberts, 1908, p. 478) and later observed, “The secret of Masonry is to
keep a secret” (Roberts, 1915, p. 59). What did Smith want to keep
secret? Besides Smith’s unusual marriage practice (Hales, 2015; Van
Wagoner, 1985, 1989) and his kingdom building ambitions (Grow, Esplin,
McGee, & Mahas, 2016), we argue it was to keep secret administration of
an entheogen in the endowment.

Creating a system of entheogenic administration is certainly a
challenge, one which Joseph Smith seems to have embarked upon and
expanded throughout his rise to religious prominence in
19<sup>th</sup>-century America. What we’re illustrating with this paper
is the key to Smith’s shamanistic practices could lie in something that
is replicable, reliable, and accessible to modern-day testability. As
will be demonstrated through parts 2 and 3, Smith made a cognizant shift
from openly practicing his shamanistic ritualism largely attended by
close members and acolytes but open to the public into very
tightly-sealed closed-door meetings with only approved fellow initiates
in attendance. The need for increased security and secrecy under the
guise of sacredness was required to keep the balance between control and
charisma in check. The remainder of the paper will chronicle Smith’s
career as a shaman with the foundation established so far. Entheogens
had roots in magic and occult esotericism. Entheogens were present in
some Masonic initiation rites. Entheogens were present in many
Indigenous societies of which Smith took particular interest throughout
his life. We believe it is reasonable to conclude entheogens were also
present in early Mormonism and can serve to explain the fall of
visionary Mormonism after the death of the founder shaman, Joseph Smith
in 1844. There’s plenty more to get to but I’ve been going for a while.
We’ll do two more parts where we really get into the juicy bits about
early Mormon history. Today was merely setting the cultural scene from
which Mormonism evolved.
