---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 169 – Council of Fifty Pt. 2 Conception, Conjugation, Conglomeration'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-169-council-fifty-pt-2-conception-conjugation-conglomeration/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-169-council-of-fifty-pt-2-conception-conjugation-conglomeration
category: History
date: 2019-08-23 03:00:00 +0000
---

Ep 169 -- Council of Fifty Pt. 2 Conception, Conjugation, Conglomeration

On this episode, we dive into part 2 of our discussion of the Council of
Fifty. What was it used for? Why was it convened? What transpired in the
closed-door meetings? What documents do we have and how did they come to
us? This episode is divided into 3 parts to help break down what we know
about the Council of Fifty. 1) Conception; how did it come to be, what
are the roots of this Council being formed, what's the doctrinal basis
for it? 2) Conjugation; the complete and total intercourse between
church and state to accomplish a singular theocratic goal. 3)
Conglomeration; the result of dozens leading thousands within a complex
theology to one single goal, complete and absolute Mormon tyranny.

Links:

Church article on Seer Stones\
<https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/history/topics/seer-stones?lang=eng>

Council of Fifty minutes\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#full-transcript>

Council of Fifty MormonThink\
<http://www.mormonthink.com/glossary/council-of-fifty.htm>

Press release for CoF minutes\
<https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/church/news/council-of-fifty-minutes-to-be-published-in-joseph-smith-papers-release?lang=eng>

The Council of Fifty and Its Members by D. Michael Quinn BYU Studies
1980\
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/council-fifty-and-its-members-1844-1945>

Joseph Smith journal 1842-44\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/27>

Joseph H. Jackson 1844 expose\
<http://www.olivercowdery.com/smithhome/1840s/1844Jack.htm>

Announcements:

Sunstone History Podcast episode 12\
<https://www.sunstonemagazine.com/episode-12-crazy-for-kirtland/>

John Whitmer History Conference\
<https://www.jwha.info/>

Protect LDS Children March on October 5, 2019\
<https://www.sltrib.com/news/2019/07/28/former-lds-bishop-sam/>\
<https://protectldschildren.org/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

How does one talk about an issue that's been systematically suppressed
for over a century and a half? I'm not talking about something that's
been overlooked or ignored, I mean actively suppressed. When it comes to
Joseph Smith being steeped in magic and the occult, the evidence for it
was regarded institutionally as unimportant, like Isaac Newton having an
extensive collection of books on alchemy in his library, which led to
lack of emphasis, study, and ignorance by church historians, with only a
few exceptions like B.H. Roberts. To the average historian, Joseph Smith
having seer stones or his magic Jupiter talisman on his person at his
death were just quirks of the man who was Joseph Smith; those artifacts
had no real impact on him as a prophet of god.

As evidence for Jo's magic worldview began to surface and be noticed by
historians in the 1960s and 70s, the institution shifted. Artifacts the
leadership of the church were ignorant of or regarded as unimportant or
inconsequential began to take on a life of their own. Scholars began
presenting alternative models of Mormon history beyond what Fawn Brodie
had included in her controversial WWII-era book. Unable to answer tough
questions about Jo's magic roots, the institution shifted from ignorance
and indifference to guarding anything controversial behind locked
vaults. The institution has always kept close to its chest documents and
artifacts that it views as controversial, but the magic stuff, and the
exciting historical life it birthed, began to fall into the category of
"suppress at all costs."

Finally, with decades of scholars and historians writing and presenting
extensively and exhaustively on the magic worldview and the occult
artifacts that can be traced to the Smith family, the church opened the
vaults for photographers to take pictures of the famed chocolate-colored
seer stone, and the photos were released as part of the Joseph Smith
Papers Project in August of 2015.

Now, on the churchofjesuschrist.org page, you can find a history essay
about the seer stones with a helpful little 5-minute video at the
bottom. You'll find a link to this in the show notes:

Seer stones

A little bit strange that we're a bit unfamiliar with. The church
transitioned from indifference on Joseph Smith magic, to hiding it, to
now embracing this singular artifact with a litany of unofficial
apologetic sources harmonizing early American occultism with the
restoration. Throughout Jo's career, his magic was minimized to keep
tough questions away from the minds of the inquiring public. His use of
magic after his death was further minimized by the Utah institution
until it had essentially vanished from the collective memory of the
average believing Mormon public. B.H. Roberts was really the only church
historian who ever thought that magic and occultism influence Joseph
Smith and the creation of the church until the 1980s and 90s. Now,
because the church has painted itself into a corner, deliberately
misrepresented pictures of the translation process with Jo having the
gold plates in front of him, wearing the breastplate and glasses, with
Oliver Cowdery there writing studiously, a legal complaint has recently
been filed against the church for fraud. I'm not going to wade into it
here, but Braden and I will probably explore it on a Glass Box episode
in the near future.

The Council of Fifty is completely different in nearly every conceivable
way. Instead of serving as the genesis of the church, it was the
endgame. Instead of being minimized and eventually forgotten, the
Council of Fifty was secretive from its inception and members could only
be inducted by pledging death oaths of secrecy. Magic in early Mormonism
requires cobbling together disparate sources and making inferences,
whereas the Council of Fifty was explicitly created for one major
purpose and the documentation surrounding it was initially extensive;
actively sought after by historians; and actively known of and
suppressed by the church. When the Council of Fifty was formed, it was
only spoken of through hushed whispers and recounted in journal entries,
sometimes in cryptic language. It was formed for the major primary
purpose of being the government of god on the earth to usher in the
millennium.

To discuss the Council of Fifty today, we're going to break this episode
down into three parts: Conception, Conjugation, Conglomeration.
Conception; how did it come to be, what are the roots of this Council
being formed, what's the doctrinal basis for it? Conjugation; the
complete and total intercourse between church and state to accomplish a
singular theocratic goal. Conglomeration; the result of dozens leading
thousands within a complex theology to one single goal, complete and
absolute Mormon tyranny.

Conception: how did it come to be, what are the roots of this Council
being formed, what's the doctrinal basis for it?

The idea of a Mormon theocracy with Jesus as the sole dictator in chief
runs to the very roots of Mormonism. It's literally one of the 13
articles of faith that there will be a "literal gathering of Israel
and... restoration of the Ten Tribes". This literal gathering will be
called "Zion (the New Jerusalem)" and it will "be built upon the
American continent" for "Christ" to "reign personally upon the earth...
and receive its paradisiacal glory." Mormon theology is a literal
Christian theocracy. Jo must have been tired of waiting around for Jesus
to come back and nuke the planet, except for his chosen people, the
Mormons, and build the kingdom of god, so Jo decided to set the gears in
motion himself.

This secretive society that set itself up as the Mormon theocratic
empire, has been known of since the inception of the church correlated
history. It occupies so little time of Joseph Smith's actual timeline
and therefore receives comparatively little attention. Also consider
everything else happening in Jo's lifetime during 1842-44, he was a busy
guy and often biographies and historiographies covering the period spend
far more ink on polygamy, Masonry, and the endowment.

Personally, my knowledge of the Council of Fifty when I began this show
could be summarized in 4 little paragraphs in No Man Knows My History by
Fawn Brodie. Beginning on page 356

> Actually the hope of becoming Governor of the Federal Territory of
> Nauvoo was a mere detail of his ambition. Joseph's utter capacity for
> contentment with a moderate success---a want that had betrayed him
> again and again and was in the end to ruin him---led him now into his
> most grandiose political maneuvers.
>
> For many years Joseph had talked about building the Kingdom of God
> upon earth, and with his increasing success the idea seems to have
> been subtly transformed from a mere symbol to a thing of substance. As
> he came more and more to look upon Nauvoo as an autonomous state, the
> Kingdom of God assumed an unmistakably temporal nature. Finally, in
> the spring of 1844, Joseph began to organize a government to rule over
> what he hoped would eventually be a sovereign Mormon state. On March
> 11 he began selecting with utmost secrecy a council of fifty "princes"
> to form what one of them described as "the highest court on earth."
> Few secrets in Mormon history have been better kept than the
> activities of this council, but it is clear that one of their first
> acts was to ordain and crown Joseph as King of the Kingdom of God.
>
> The Council of Fifty was composed of men who had been reared in a
> tradition of militant democracy. They never dreamed of comparing their
> prophet with Aaron Burr, although it was the same fabulous
> opportunities that drove both men to destruction. What utterly
> disarmed Joseph's followers was that he had brought God into his
> realm. And these men lived close to a Bible in which God's servants
> had been kings.
>
> When Joseph in a public speech on May 10, 1844 pronounced defiantly:
> "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of
> Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that
> will revolutionize the whole world," only a handful knew that the
> kingdom had already been established. "It will not be by sword or gun
> that this kingdom will roll on," he assured them, "the power of truth
> is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the
> Gospel."

Such a monumental event in Mormon history obviously has been
overshadowed by more scandalous Nauvoo issues, but I would argue the
Council of Fifty is the single most important issue of Joseph Smith's
life and ministry. The gravity of what this thing is has only recently
come into focus. Like I said, when I started the podcast I knew next to
nothing about it. Then, during Sunstone of 2015, I organized a hangout
at Squatter's pub in downtown Salt Lake City. Two of the attendees there
were named Brandon and Heather King. They invited me to meet some
friends of theirs in their lovely home and we had a wonderful evening.
Brandon told me about a book he'd recently read by Jedediah Rogers
titled "The Council of Fifty: A Documentary History" which intrigued me.

When I got home to Colorado at the time, a package came in the mail from
the King residence, and lo and behold, it was a copy of the book with
this note on the inside flap:

> Bryce,\
> We love the podcast & how you bring life to our history.\
> Thank you for your work in making the world a better place\
> Brandon King\
> Heather King\
> 9-10-15

I thanked them dearly for their kind gift of this book, but that thanks
came with a caveat. I knew I wouldn't need the book for a while so I
told them that this will come in handy when we get to 1844, at which
time I would give them a proper thanks. Well, almost 4 years to the day
after getting this copy in the mail, I can now officially say, thank you
Brandon and Heather. Thank you for inviting me into your beautiful home
with Brandon's incredible landscaping, thank you for coming to the live
shows and hangouts, and thank you for this book. I'll be using it
extensively for the short remainder of Jo's history on the podcast.

How have historians known about this secretive society? If it was secret
when it convened, participants were sworn to secrecy with threats of
death, and any documentation about it has been actively hidden by the
church, how have people known about it and what sources have they used
to glean the little snippets of information about it? Mostly, knowledge
of the Council of Fifty has come from contemporary journal entries of
participants. The minutes themselves have historically been closed to
researchers since they were committed to the first presidency's vault in
the late 1800s, but select researchers have had access to the minutes
and to the journals of participants to form a small font of solid
evidence about it.

Most notably, B. H. Roberts included allusions to the Council of Fifty
in the Documentary History of the Church vol. 6. This is from the Dan
Vogel edition of the History of the Church on page 288, under the entry
for March 11, 1844, the day it was organized.

> Monday 11.---At home till 9; then spent the day in council in the
> lodge room over Henry Miller's house.
>
> Present Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball,
> Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, George A.
> Smith, William W. Phelps, John M. Bernhisel, Lucien Woodworth, George
> Miller, Alexander Badlam, Peter Haws, Erastus Snow, Reynolds Cahoon,
> Amos Fielding, Alpheus Cutler, Levi Richards, Newel K. Whitney,
> Lorenzo D. Wasson and William Clayton, whom I organized into a special
> council to take into consideration the subject matter contained in the
> above letters, and also the best policy for this people to adopt to
> obtain their rights from the nation, and insure protection for
> themselves and children; and to secure a resting place in the
> mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty
> of conscience, guaranteed to us by the constitution of our country;
> rendered doubly sacred by the precious blood of our fathers, and
> denied to us by the present authorities, who have smuggled themselves
> into power in the States and nation.

This was all B. H. Roberts included in the official History of the
Church, but he cut out a significant portion from the day from Jo's
journal, which was used as the source for what we just read, which
really puts into context what was meant by Jo when he referred to
securing an uninhabited resting place in the mountains. The portion that
was cut from Jo's journal, but restored by the studios Dan Vogel is as
follows:

> Joseph asked, can this council keep what I say, not make it public,
> all held up their hands. Copy of the Constitution of the U. S.; hands
> of a select committee. No laws can be enacted but what every man can
> be protected from. Grant their petition, go ahead concerning the
> Indians and Southern states &c. Send 25 men by the Pinery through to
> Santa Fee &c, and if Houston will embrace the gospel. \[We\] can amend
> the constitution and make it the voice of Jehovah and shame the U.S.
> parley Pratt in favor. Hyrum concurred...

The first meeting Jo called every man to secrecy asking if he can trust
them. They had a unanimous vote that they were sworn to secrecy and the
first subject under deliberation for the Council of Fifty was to
determine the next settlement land for the Mormons. Whether it be
California, Texas, or somewhere else like Oregon, the Mormon leadership
knew the Nauvoo settlement was a ticking time bomb. We'll be discussing
this extensively in a bit, but let's continue to cover how elusive the
Council of Fifty has been for historians of this century.

Various historians since the Fawn Brodie passage I read earlier have
mentioned or studied the Council of Fifty. Most notably, Juanita Brooks,
one of the most gifted historians of the 20^th^ century, along with
Robert Glass Cleland, edited John D. Lee's journals. Juanita Brooks had
a special fascination with John D. Lee and her work on John D. Lee was
absolutely seminal in the secularizing of the Mountain Meadows Massacre.
Will Bagley in his Blood of the Prophets essentially calls his own
groundbreaking book a second edition of Juanita Brooks' work on John D.
Lee. Brooks and Cleland's work on John D. Lee's journals was
particularly revealing of the post-Joseph era of the Council of Fifty,
as Lee's journals cover 1848-1876. They published their work in 1955,
which spawned a whole new era of Council of Fifty research. Following up
on their work, James R. Clark published "The Kingdom of God, the Council
of Fifty, and the State of Deseret" as an article in Utah Historical
Quarterly in 1958. 1958 also saw Hyrum Andrus's "Joseph Smith and World
Government", and Leonard Arrington's seminal Utah history book through
the lens of an educated economist, "Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic
History of the Latter-day Saints". Building on this ever-growing body of
political work and fragmentary history of the Council of Fifty, Jo Ann
Shipps published her Ph.D. dissertation titled "The Mormon in Politics:
The First Hundred Years" in 1965, and Klaus Hansen's "Quest for Empire:
The Political Kingdom of God and the Council of Fifty in Mormon History"
has remained the largest seminal work focusing exclusively on the
Council of Fifty. Hansen's work was met with criticism for his hyperbole
and sensationalism. Finally, in 1980, D. Michael Quinn entered the fray.
His 1976 dissertation became the first book of the 3-volume series known
as "The Mormon Hierarchy". In The Mormon Hierarchy, Quinn dealt
extensively with the Council of Fifty. Under the employment of Leonard
Arrington, the church's official historian during the 70s and 80s, Quinn
gained access to a wealth of never-before-seen documents concerning the
Council of Fifty, among a litany of other early Mormon subjects. Quinn
revised his chapter on the Council of Fifty from The Mormon Hierarchy
and published it as a standalone article in BYU studies in 1980, which
also served as a historiography of the topic. I'll also be pulling
heavily from Quinn's BYU article, which is hosted on
ChurchofJesusChrist.org, for today's show, in addition to some of these
other resources.

All of this leads to Jedidiah Rogers publishing his book, The Council of
Fifty: a Documentary History, through Signature Books in 2014. Besides
revealing how much of a sausage fest Mormon history is, that list of
publications over nearly 80 years reveals the primary issue with the
Council of Fifty and what historians know about it. It's a subject
that's been closed to research because of the secrecy and controversy of
the council. This book summarizes the roadblock instated by the church
when studying the Council of Fifty in a couple paragraphs and footnotes
of the introduction:

> Readers of this volume deserve to know specifically what documents the
> church withheld from me. They are: the Nauvoo founding minutes and
> notes relating to the Council of Fifty; the council minutes kept in
> Utah Territory; some official council records such as roll books for
> the years 1845, 1849, 1867, 1868, 1880, and 1882; and extant diaries
> for Horace S. Eldredge, Heber J. Grant, Moses Thatcher, and Brigham
> Young Jr. Fortunately, much---although not all---of this material is
> available from other sources such as the transcripts historian D.
> Michael Quinn prepared in the 1970s when he was allowed to see the
> originals. The principal exceptions are three small Nauvoo minute
> books titled "Record of the Council of Fifty or Kingdom of God" kept
> by recorder William Clayton from March to May 1844 and from February
> 1845 to January 1846. These were famously kept out of view of even
> archivists, locked in the LDS First Presidency Vault until 2010... I
> repeatedly asked to see these documents and was repeatedly denied
> permission.

And in the footnote we find this interesting passage:

> I requested access to the Council of Fifty records in September 2012
> and was informed the following month that my request had been denied.
> I renewed my attempt through informal conversation with church
> archivists at the 2013 Mormon History Association conference and was
> given permission to see a portion of the Council of Fifty Papers,
> 1845-1883, MS 3405---specifically the diaries of council members from
> the territorial period---but was informed that I would not be able to
> see the body's official minutes. Church history librarians were
> helpful in suggesting other sources and providing access to periphery
> documents, and in at least two cases they agreed to proof an entry in
> my transcript against the original.
>
> Signature Books's editors requested permission to see the Council of
> Fifty Papers while they were proofing transcriptions against the
> original sources and were told via email of April 17, 2014, that
> although the records include minutes as late as the 1880s that would
> not be published as part of the Joseph Smith Papers, the archives
> nevertheless reserved the first right of publication and would not
> allow the public to view them for the time being.

Just like with the William Clayton Nauvoo Journals, the phrases "first
right of publication" and "closed to research" left hook and uppercut
the church has frequently used to bludgeon historians who're asking
about controversial documents. They've repeatedly asserted privilege of
publication and sacrosanctity of documents to kick the can down the road
in hopes that people will simply stop asking and they can continue to
suppress the documents in their special collections and vaults. What the
hell does a church need a vault for anyway? It's a church, not an arms
dealer.

Let's begin with Quinn's 1980 BYU studies article on the Council of
Fifty. His opening seeks to take the wind out of the sails of anybody
seeking to expand the intent and role of the Council of Fifty beyond
what the documentation will support. Quinn is one of the most
conservative and well-respected historians in the field so when he says
we should view the Council of Fifty with as much complexity and
understanding as possible, we should listen. Needless to say, Quinn
believes that the evidence surfacing at the time about the Council of
Fifty doesn't require a rewriting of Mormon history, but a rewriting of
those articles and books about the Council of Fifty so as not to
sensationalize or distort our perspective.

> Since the mid-1950s, several articles, graduate theses, and books have
> examined the existence and supposed role of the "Council of Fifty" in
> Mormon history, so that by now the Council of fifty is within the
> general awareness of a large proportion of Latter-day saints as well
> as interested non-Mormons. Unfortunately, these writers did not have
> access to documents presently available; and, in some cases, they did
> not consult important sources then available. Because casual
> examination can make anything appear monstrous under the academic
> microscope, scholarly studies of the Council of Fifty thus far have
> tended to distort insufficient evidence and sometimes to
> sensationalize their interpretations. Current research into the
> documents and historical environment of the Council of Fifty requires
> a rewriting of these scholarly and highly popular interpretations
> rather than a rewriting of Mormon history in light of these previous
> interpretations of the Council of Fifty.

He then boils the intent and role of the Council of Fifty to two points.
Number one, "was to symbolize the otherworldly world order that would be
established during the millennial reign of Christ on earth." This is
certainly true. I would add a small passage from the introduction of
Rogers' book to put that phrase into deeper context.

> By 1844, fourteen years after the church's founding, Smith's
> home-grown religion had become not only a religious force but a
> political one, Smith himself feeling empowered to act boldly in the
> face of either outside resistance or internal dissent. In establishing
> what had been referred to as God's earthly kingdom, he organized a
> secret political legislature he called the General Council or Council
> of Fifty, named after the number of men prescribed to comprise it. Its
> ultimate purpose was to establish a worldly kingdom that would usurp
> all others and receive Jesus at his Second Coming. Clayton believed
> the fifty replicated "the Grand Council amongst the Gods when the
> organization of this world was contemplated."...
>
> Mormons were to be center stage in the unfolding cosmic drama of the
> Parousia, according to Smith. Their work would be to build a city of
> God...
>
> Smith envisioned it as a vehicle for expanding the church's temporal
> influence. The theocratic government would serve as an important
> bridge to the Millennium, at which time they would hand over political
> power to Christ.

The apocalyptic millennialist idea that Jesus would reign as ruler of
the earth upon his second coming wasn't unique to Mormonism. However,
the idea that the church needed to establish its own theocratic system
of literal physical government in order to build the kingdom and thereby
build the throne from which Jesus would reign upon his return, was a
uniquely Mormon thing. Jesus, with his godly power, apparently needs
help with making government. That, and he needs your money. Jesus always
needs your money.

Quinn continues that the second intention or role of the Council of
Fifty "involved its literal, practical functions." He continues, "The
Council was not a challenge to the existing system of law and government
but functioned in roles familiar to American political science; special
interest lobby, caucus, local political machine, and private
organization governed the parliamentary procedures." I'll discuss that
in a second because Quinn built a lot into that sentence that requires
parsing. But he also says, "Because LDS leaders did not regard the
Council of Fifty as subversive of American institutions, its existence
was among common knowledge among Latter-day Saints as long as it
functioned, and its deliberations were no more secret than were those of
the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles." After which he calls it, "a
non-revolutionary political instrument,".

Okay, I'm going to do my best to take Quinn to task here because I have
some disagreements that are most-likely informed by my extreme dearth of
understanding of Mormon history compared with his, but I can still offer
my thoughts and opinions and let you, the skeptical listener, decide
what makes sense for yourself.

To what extent the Council of Fifty was actually secretive to the
every-day Mormon in Nauvoo can't really be known. We can't jump in a
time machine or look into a seer stone to see what people talked about
in the street every day. However, many institutions within Mormonism at
this time were kept behind closed doors. People may have heard about the
Quorum of the Anointed but they didn't know what happened there. Mormons
knew about Jo's politicking and various church officials being sent to
other states to electioneer for Jo, but they didn't know what was
actually being preached to the outsiders. There were a LOT of rumors
about polygamy, but the average Mormon could never get concrete evidence
that it was happening unless they were targeted to become initiates into
the New and Everlasting Covenant. When Quinn says, "by now the Council
of fifty is within the general awareness of a large proportion of
Latter-day saints as well as interested non-Mormons," that's him
projecting his own view of Mormon history on the larger population. In
1980, he knew a lot about the Council of Fifty, as did any other Mormon
historian, and the number of people who know about it has since grown.
But, to claim "a large proportion of Latter-day Saints," are familiar
with the Council of Fifty is baffling to me. At your next family meal,
ask your believing loved ones about the Council of Fifty apropos of
nothing. "Hey, pass the potatoes; what are your thoughts on the Council
of Fifty," and look at the blank stares around the table. Walk into
church next week with a white apron and tell a guy that you just joined
the Council of Fifty and you're waiting for your gold watch in the mail.
See what the reactions are. This is Mormon history that even ExMormons
who know about polygamy, and the Book of Abraham, with access to Google
know hardly anything about, even if they've heard the name before.

That's my first contention with what Quinn claimed. Next, to his point
about "The Council was not a challenge to the existing system of law and
government but functioned in roles familiar to American political
science; special interest lobby, caucus, local political machine, and
private organization governed the parliamentary procedures," calling the
Council of Fifty "a non-revolutionary political instrument." There is
merit to this point. Jo was surrounded by a lot of smart people and he
knew that. Jo valued their contributions to the deliberative process
within the Council, which is captured by his concluding speech on the
day it was organized.

CoF minutes courtesy of Quilliam Claypen:

> It was encouraging to witness the union of feeling which prevailed on
> the subject and it was plain that although separated a long distance
> from each other yet the same feelings had run through the minds of the
> brethren here as was contained in the letters. Prest. Joseph said he
> wanted all the brethren to speak their minds on this subject and to
> say what was in their hearts whether good or bad. He did not want to
> be forever surrounded by a set of "dough heads" and if they did not
> rise up and
> shake themselves[64](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#17425862927293237318) and
> exercise themselves in discussing these important matters he should
> consider them nothing better than "dough heads". He gave some
> good advise which seemed to have due effect.

This democratic spirit lasted for a short time in the Council of Fifty.
In the William Clayton Journal we find this interesting passage:

> April 11, 1844 We had a glorious interview. President Joseph was voted
> our P\[rophet\] P\[riest\] and K\[ing\] with loud Hosannas.

The corresponding day's minutes, also in the hand of Quilliam, describe
the scene after Jo finished a fiery rant during which he broke a
pointing stick in half from whacking it on stuff too hard:

> After further instruction, the council voted to receive JS as
> "Prophet, Priest & King." Rigdon appointed [Samuel
> Bent](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#14471148638398690559) chairman
> pro tem in order to propose taking a second expression of the vote, to
> be followed by shouts of "hosanna," as an adjournment of the morning
> meeting. The council voted affirmatively and closed the meeting
> accordingly.
>
> In the afternoon meeting JS instructed the council on several
> principles. He spoke on the importance of religious tolerance and
> explained the significance of including council members who were not
> Latter-day Saints.

We'll get to that point about including non-Mormons in the council in a
little while, but how can the dictator of a theocratic council be
crowned Prophet, Priest, and King, while still maintaining a fair system
of checks and balances with the other members? It can't be done. The
Council of Fifty maintained this tradition of anointing their chairman
as Prophet, Priest, and King all the way up to John Taylor, and possibly
even Wilford Woodruff. Once again from Quinn's 1980 article:

> The anointing and ordination of John Taylor in 1885 as "King, Priest
> and Ruler over Israel on the Earth---over Zion & the Kingdom of
> Christ" is important as a verifying evidence. First, it corroborates
> the accuracy of earlier statements that Joseph Smith received the same
> ceremony at the hands of the Council of Fifty some forty years before.
> Second, it clarifies that Heber C. Kimball was alluding to Brigham
> Young's having received the same ordinance when Heber stated:
>
> The Church and kingdom to which we belong will become the kingdom of
> our God and his Christ, and brother Brigham Young will become
> President of the United States. (Voices responded, "Amen.") And I tell
> you he will be something more; but we do not now want to give him the
> name: but he is called and ordained to a far greater station than
> that, and he is foreordained to take that station, and he has got it.
>
> Although the exact date on which Brigham Young obtained the theocratic
> ordination of King, Priest, and Ruler over Israel is not presently
> known, he undoubtedly received it in the same manner that Joseph Smith
> did on 11 April 1844 and John Taylor did on 4 February 1885.

Mormonism is a religion that operated a sovereign sectarian government
while rejecting the power of the larger secular government. This
religious theocracy was chaired by men who are voted unanimously to be
"Prophet, Priest, and King" "ruler over Israel on Earth---Over Zion &
the Kingdom of Christ" and aspired to the highest elected offices of
secular government. These issues should be troubling because every
religion is inextricably tied to its own history. These sentiments are
foundational to the church and survive subconsciously in some moderated
form in the minds of believers and the leadership today. This. Is. Not.
Okay. And it's something we can never forget.

Nauvoo Mormonism was quintessentially anti-government, but not in the
way radical Mormons are today where all government is evil and is going
to take away muh guns! Nauvoo Mormonism's anti-government was a far more
complex and insidious anti-disestablishmentarianism form of
anti-government. Ohio Mormonism took a hands-off approach to government,
by in large. Missouri Mormonism, though, was where anti-government and
Mormon exceptionalism really gained a foothold. The Mormon leadership
operated in open defiance of the government. Jo was wanted in the state
of Missouri until the day he died for high treason, a charge with plenty
of evidence to prosecute him, which is why he never set foot back in the
state after his escape in 1839. In Missouri, he prototyped his own
military and political system with the Army of Israel and the Daughters
of Zion. The Danites! The officials who would rule the Kingdom of
Daniel, the great Kingdom of God. The Danites were Jo's first official
foray into sectarian government within the confines of a strictly
secular nation. It failed because the Missouri militia was far-superior
to the Mormon militia and Illinois became the new headquarters for the
Mormon empire; the kingdom on the Mississippi. When that failed, the
Mormons moved somewhere they expected to be completely left alone by the
government, and they were for long enough to accomplish the true
theocratic climax of religious exceptionalism and privilege that allowed
genocide, slavery, sex trafficking, and iron-fisted totalitarian rule by
one objectively evil human being who happens to have a city and 4
universities named after him. This is not normal. This is not okay. This
is what happens when all human rights completely break down for a
miniscule period of time.

Conjugation: the complete and total intercourse between church and state
to accomplish a singular theocratic goal.

When the Mormons settled in Illinois and across the Mississippi in Iowa
territory, they were only chummy with the government to the extent they
could use it. They were super friendly to the Illinois state legislature
when they wanted the Nauvoo charter rubber stamped through and it was
approved. They were begging on their knees to get redress for lost
property in Missouri when the Mormons billed the U.S. government \$1.2
mn. The petition was denied and anti-government sentiment in public
sermons grew to an all-time high. Jo and other Mormon leaders exchanged
pleasant letters with Governors Carlin and Ford when they needed
something like protection from Missouri sheriffs who came to Illinois to
arrest and extradite Jo to answer for his Missouri crimes. These
singular events coalesce to make my point that the Mormons only liked
the government to the extent that it could benefit them. Otherwise, the
majority of the Mormon populace, especially the leadership, were
viciously anti-government. Take, for example, Jo's public sermon on
March 7, 1844, just 4 days before the Council of Fifty was formed.

> As to politics, I care but little about the presidential chair; I
> would not give half as much for the office of President of the United
> States, as I would for the one I now hold as Lieut.-General of the
> Nauvoo Legion.\
> We have as good a right to make a political party to gain power to
> defend ourselves, as for demagogues to make use of our religion to get
> power to destroy us; in other words, as the world has used the power
> of government to oppress and persecute us, it is right for us to use
> it for the protection of our rights; we will whip the mob by getting
> up a candidate for President.\
> When I get hold of the eastern papers, and see how popular I am, I am
> afraid myself that I shall be elected; but if I should be, I would not
> say, '*Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you.'*\
> The Government will not receive any advice our counsel from me---they
> are self-sufficient; but they must go to hell, and work out their own
> salvation with fear and trembling.

There's plenty more to the speech that has to do with his presidential
platform that we aren't going to discuss right now; the annexation of
Texas, the freeing of slaves to "send the Negroes to Texas, and from
Texas to Mexico, where all colors are alike." In order to "set the
Negroes free, and use the Negroes and Indians against our foes" for
Texan independence from Britain. What a raging progressive Jo was. This
isn't the episode where we wade into Jo's plans for the Native Americans
and the freed slaves in a military uprising, although that will be an
undercurrent of the 3^rd^ section today.

The point I'm making here is that Jo didn't view the Presidency as the
climax of his aspirations, he saw it as a tool to accomplish a much
larger end; that of building Zion. He wanted the Presidency so he could
use the office to accomplish his great plans of becoming the modern
American Moses. Joseph Smith lamenting demagogues using Mormonism to
gain political power is truly a remarkable lack of self-awareness; that,
or overt manipulation, on Jo's part. But it shouldn't strain credulity
that an anti-government demagogue like Joseph Smith would use the office
of president for his own personal gain instead of the height of career
aspirations. This may seem hard to believe that a person might treat the
presidency as a stepping stone or good business move, but I offer 1828
and 2016 as case in point studies of how it has happened before and will
happen again.

When D. Michael Quinn says, "The Council was not a challenge to the
existing system of law and government but functioned in roles familiar
to American political science; special interest lobby, caucus, local
political machine, and private organization governed the parliamentary
procedures." I simply can't agree with him. Why did the Mormons need
their own government? Was the American government not good enough for
them? If the Council wasn't a challenge to the existing system of law,
why did Jo tell Quilliam Claypen to burn or bury the minutes when he
gave himself up for arrest? The Council of Fifty minutes were evidence
of committing high treason, a crime Jo had a long track record with; if
those minutes fell into the hands of the Illinois prosecuting attorney
during Jo's impending trial after Carthage, that was all the government
needed to throw a noose around his neck. The Mormon theocratic
government was structured in a system that was familiar to American and
the Saxon government which birthed the American system because it was
effective and fills the necessary roles a government should. The Mormon
government was the replacement for the secular government and that's how
it was viewed at the time.

More from the introduction to Rogers' book that illustrates the mindset
of the members who were inducted into the Council. Regardless of how we
view it today, whether through minimalization or sensationalization,
what the members wrote contemporary with the foundation should be
considered the authoritative source for the point and role the Council
of Fifty was to fulfill.

> One of Smith's counselors, Sidney Rigdon, reflected in an 1844 speech
> that he and the modern-day prophet "had things to say to one another
> that nobody else knew of---\[how\] all nations \[would\] flock to
> \[their message\]---whole nations \[would be\] born in one day\-\--we
> talked such big things... We were maturing plans 14 years ago which we
> can now tell."... (plans which we can now tell... what gave them
> license to finally hatch those plans? What changed? Jo running for
> president with Sidney Rigdon as his VP maybe?)
>
> Council members may have believed, with Benjamin F. Johnson, that "the
> embryo kingdom of God upon the earth" would grow until it achieved its
> destiny of world domination."...
>
> Lyman Wight, a member of the pineries mission (which we'll get into
> eventually) who was later sent to found a colony in Texas, believed
> "the Church stands regularly organized to bear off the kingdom
> triumphantly over the head of every opposition, and to establish Zion
> no more to be thrown down forever."

This wasn't supposed to be the kingdom of God during Joseph Smith's
presidency, this was to be the final system of government the earth
would ever need.

Let's discuss the membership of the Council of Fifty. How did a person
move from a member of the general leadership of the church to becoming
an inductee into the Council of the Kingdom of God? It was actually an
interesting process. It was invite only and it required unanimous vote
of the existing council to bring in any new members. They were always
seated oldest to youngest in a circle from right to left of the
President, who was Joseph Smith then Bloody Brigham Young after Jo's
death.

From Quinn's 1980 BYU Studies article:

> Admission to the Council of Fifty came in three stages, which could
> occur on one day or on three separate days---a man's name was proposed
> (most often by the LDS President as standing chairman of the Council),
> and then voted on, and then the man was formally initiated into the
> Council. On the day of their admission, new members affirmed that they
> were in fellowship with all other Council members, and then an officer
> or the Council of Fifty proceeded in "giving them the 'Charge,' 'The
> name,' & 'Key word,' and the 'Constitution,' and 'Penalty.'" Once
> admitted, men remained members of the Council of Fifty for life,
> unless they were dropped by the Council for disaffection. Not until
> 1882 did the Council add the option of release due to old age and
> disability.

This was all in addition to the person's name, tokens, and clothing they
received when going through the endowment ceremony. It's unclear to me
whether they used the same new name in the Council of Fifty as they
received when they first took out their endowments, but that seems
reasonable to me. What that means is this was the next level of
ascendency in Mormon leadership that superseded all other leadership
positions in the church. If you were allowed to join the Council of
Fifty, that was leveling up in the clandestine shadow organization of
the church. This was the Mormon version of the briefcase that teaches
you about Xenu and the galactic confederacy. This is the Mormon space
opera. The "charge, name & keyword constitution and penalty" were likely
similar to those processes as included in the endowment, although likely
slightly altered. Unfortunately, I haven't been able to find any sources
that describe what the initiation ceremony was like when it came to the
Council of Fifty because it was so secretive.

Who was eligible to become a member? Once again from Quinn's 1980 BYU
Studies article, which is excellent even if I disagree with a couple of
his conclusions to a slight degree:

> The first evident characteristic of the Council of Fifty's membership
> is the extent to which Church office was important. From 1844 to 1884
> the Council of Fifty included every contemporary member of the First
> Presidency except the disaffected William Law, every member of the
> Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, every Presiding Patriarch except John
> Smith (b. 1832, son of Hyrum Smith), every member of the Presiding
> Bishopric except Jesse C. Little, and more than forty-four percent of
> the First Council of the Seventy. Of local officers during the period,
> forty-eight percent of the stake presidents and a much smaller
> percentage of the ward bishops were members of the Council of Fifty
> during their ecclesiastical service in these positions. This Church
> identity of members of the Council of Fifty was mentioned in an 1882
> revelation:
>
> Behold you are my kingdom and rulers in my Kingdom and then you are
> also, many of you, rulers in my Church according to your ordinations
> therein. For are you not of the First Presidency, and of the Twelve
> Apostles and some Presidents of Stakes, and some Bishops, and some
> High Priests and some Seventies and Elders therein? And are ye not all
> of my Church and belong to my holy Priesthood?

So, that's what qualified a person to join. Once a person was on the
inside, codenames and euphemisms were needed to maintain secrecy. The
Council of Fifty was called by numerous names by numerous people
throughout its existence. These names, more than any contemporary
journal entry, reveal the true intent for the council. Reading from
Quinn's BYU studies article, which, as always, you'll find linked in the
show notes.

> ...the official, revealed name of the Council of Fifty is "The Kingdom
> of God and His Laws with the Keys and Power\[s\] thereof, and Judgment
> in the Hands of His Servants, Ahman Christ." This name was too complex
> to be easily remembered or written, and so this organization had a
> wide assortment of shorter designations. Sticking closely to the
> revealed name, Heber C. Kimball and John Henry Smith called it "The
> Kingdom of God." In a briefer reference to the full name, Joseph
> Smith, Willard Richards, and Heber C. Kimball mentioned it as Council
> of Fifty "The Kingdom," and Heber C. Kimball sometimes called it
> simply "The K." After referring to it three times as "Special
> Council," the Manuscript History of the Church and the published
> History of the Church henceforth called it "the General Council."
> George Miller and Franklin D. Richards designated it "Council of the
> Kingdom," whereas William Clayton expanded that to "the council of the
> Kingdom of God." Joseph Fielding in 1844 called it the "Grand
> Council," whereas Lyman Wight in 1848 described it as the "Grand
> Council of the Kingdom of God," "Grand Council of God," and "Grand
> Council of Heaven." John D. Lee exuberantly called it "councils of the
> Gods," whereas Daniel Spencer and Robert T. Burton obliquely listed it
> as "Council of ---." In 1849 men like Joseph Fielding, Horace S.
> Eldredge, and John D. Lee called it "Legislative Council" but dropped
> that name in 1850 when Congress created Utah Territory with a civil
> legislature in which the upper house was called the Legislative
> Council. John D. Lee also described it as "Municipal department of the
> Kingdom of God," which Brigham Young, Jr., echoed later as "Church
> municipal board."\
> The identity of the Council of Fifty with the church was emphasized
> when Wilford Woodruff, Hosea Stout, and the Manuscript History of the
> Church called it "Council of Elders" and when Robert T. Burton called
> it "Council of the Presiding Authorities of the Church." Orson Hyde
> more clearly stated this Church identity when he addressed a letter to
> the Council of Fifty on 25 April 1844 as "the Council of the Church of
> Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints." Also, the Council of Fifty
> sometimes carried the name of the Church President: "Joseph Smith's
> Council," "President Young's Council," or "President Taylor's
> Council."

All these different names for the same organization meant that the
relatively undefined and fluid purpose of the council could quickly
adapt to any issue or purpose that was needed at any given time. With
ill-defined parameters from its inception, the Council of Fifty could
evolve to become what the true full name of it was when it was first
conceived; "The Kingdom of God and His Laws with the Keys and Power
thereof, and Judgement in the Hands of His Servants, Ahman Christ." The
Kingdom of God, and god's servants have the keys and powers of judgement
in their hands. Judgement of the unrighteous, the heretics, the
anti-Mormons in defiance of the Kingdom of God and His Laws, watch your
back.

The next 2 paragraphs of Quinn's BYU Studies article describe exactly
what I mean with the fluidity and expansive power, along with some of
the secrecy captured in the various names.

> Because Joseph Smith admitted more than fifty men to his special
> council in the spring of 1844, most members called it Council of
> Fifty. Even this name had several variations: Brigham Young referred
> to it as "the fifty," Shadrach Roundy called it "council of fifties,"
> Charles C. Rich wrote it as "council of ft," Franklin D. Richards
> sometimes wrote it as "Council of 50---Kingdom," Willard Richards and
> John D. Lee spelled fifty backwards and rendered it "Council of
> YTFIF," Joseph F. Smith used the Roman numeral for fifty and wrote
> "Council of L," George Miller called it "council of fifty princes of
> the kingdom," whereas Willard Richards, Phinehas Richards, and David
> Fullmer designated it "The Quorum of 50." One additional name for the
> Council of Fifty deserves separate consideration. Its members also
> called the Council of Fifty the "Living Constitution" or "Council of
> the Living Constitution." Some writers have confused this with the
> name of the fifteen trustees of the Mercantile and Mechanical
> association of Nauvoo who were presented in a public meeting on 31
> January 1845 as the "Living Constitution" of that association. The two
> "Living Constitutions" were as distinct as their separate organization
> dates. Although eight members of this business "Living Constitution,"
> were already members of the Council of Fifty's "Living Constitution,"
> two others were never members of the Council of Fifty, and five other
> members of this 1845 business "Living Constitution" did not join the
> Council of Fifty until from one month to (in one case) twenty-two
> years later.

Living Constitution is an interesting name for the Council of Fifty.
Having a book of living scriptures where revelations can be added at any
time and new revelations trump the old, patterning the Mormon new world
government with similar fluidity was a notable characteristic. This
means the Council of Fifty, from its inception through its supposed
death in Utah, was patterned after useful church characteristics coupled
with structures present in the Constitution of the United States. This
council wasn't viewed as a pillar of religious government to help
support the secular constitution of the nation, it was created as the
replacement for the secular system of government. It was created to be
the Kingdom of God on earth, there is simply no other way of viewing the
evidence. What it eventually resulted in and the relative impotence of
the Council after Jo's death is a separate issue from what the intention
was when it was founded.

The initial intent of the Council of Fifty is really what's at issue
here, not the result. The Council in Utah under Bloody Brigham's reign
was neutered as he extended his ever-expanding power grabs, but that's a
story we simply can't get into today. In Nauvoo, the Council of Fifty
was truly the culmination of all political and ecclesiastical power
funneled into a single organizational body. This was exactly what Joseph
Smith worked for his entire life.

Conglomeration; the result of dozens leading thousands within a complex
theology to one single goal, complete and absolute Mormon tyranny.

The Council of Fifty wasn't organized in a vacuum. It was formed to
fulfill a few very specific functions. The Mormon leadership was
constantly on the lookout for a good place to settle outside of the
control of the U.S. government, which is an issue that will occupy an
increasing amount of time as we move through the remainder of Jo's life
and into the schism crisis. It was also formed to electioneer for Jo's
presidential campaign. These, however, were the stepping stones required
for the Council of Fifty to fulfill it's ultimate role, the new world
government, the theodemocracy of Zion. Jo winning or losing the election
of President in the upcoming 1844 vote dictated the direction of the
Council of Fifty. If he was successful, the Council would become the new
government, if he didn't win, the Council of Fifty would become the new
territorial government for wherever the Mormons decided to settle. Then,
it would use its influence to ally oppressed Native American tribes,
freed slaves, and anybody unhappy with the federal government for any
reason, to overtake the government by force. These aspirations are
abundantly illustrated in speeches made in public fora by various church
leaders as well as the Council minutes themselves.

From a speech by Hingepin Sidney Rigdon 2 weeks after the Council of
Fifty was formed and a week after he was inducted as a member:

Vogel HoC 6:302

> A word concerning power. History refers us back beyond Civilization in
> treating upon this subject. In consequence of power, there is strength
> and glory. Where there is no power it is like flies without any order
> or rule. I have viewed the nations of the earth and the way they are
> relaxing in power and the course they are pursuing. One hundred years
> will not pass away till there would not be a man or woman on the
> earth, and nothing but the hand of God can save it, and this is why
> God would send Elijah to do his work, for all the power the nations
> will soon have is to destroy each other. For soon nation will be
> against nation\[,\] party against party\[,\] the rich against the poor
> and the poor against the rich\[,\] until they are destroyed from under
> heaven.

Jo took the stand after Hingepin Rigdon:

> In relation to the power over the minds of mankind which I hold, I
> would say it is in consequence of the power of truth in the doctrines
> which I have been an instrument in the hands of God of presenting unto
> them, and not because of any compulsion on my part... I am the voice
> of one crying in the wilderness, "repent ye of your sins and prepare
> the way for the coming of the Son of Man, for the kingdom of God has
> come unto you and henceforth the axe is laid unto the root of the
> tree, and every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, God Almighty
> (and not Joe Smith) shall hew it down and cast it into the fire."

First meeting of CoF:

> All seemed agreed to look to some place where we can go and establish
> a Theocracy either
> in [Texas](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#15217578534757404352) or [Oregon](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#14146619145595667336) or
> somewhere
> in [California](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#15669491914721562518) &c.
> The brethren spoke very warmly on the subject, and also on the subject
> of forming a constitution which shall be according to the mind of
> God and erect it between the heavens and the earth where all nations
> might flow unto it.

William Clayton journal a month after the Council was formed.

> April 13, 1844 A.M. at President Joseph's recording Deeds. He
> prophecied the entire overthrow of this nation in a few years.

This was the plan all along. The entire overthrow of the American
nation. This was far from the first time Jo prophesied of such
calamitous events befalling the European imperialists. The introduction
to the Book of Mormon states its intent explicitly:

> ...wherefore it is an abridgement of the record of the People of Nephi
> & also of the Lamanites *written to the Lamanites*...that they may
> know the covenants of the Lord that they are not cast off forever &
> also to the convinceing of the Jew & Gentile that Jesus is the Christ
> the Eternal God manifesting himself unto all Nations...

The Book of Mormon was crafted to convert the Native Americans to
Christianity en masse who would then look to Joseph Smith as their
prophet and follow his lead.

In a revelation dated to December 1832, less than 3 years into Jo's
ministry, he dictated a revelation that was canonized as D&C 87 in the
1876 version of the Brighamite D&C. This was one of the revelations that
got the Mormons kicked out of Jackson County, Missouri in the first
place.

> 3\. For behold , the Southern States shall be divided against the
> Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations,
> even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also
> call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other
> nations ; and thus war shall be poured out upon all nations.
>
> 4. And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up
> against their masters, who shall be marshalled and disciplined for
> war:
>
> 5. And it shall come to pass also, that the remnants \[Native
> Americans\] who are left of the land will marshal themselves, and
> shall become exceeding angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore
> vexation;
>
> 6. And thus, with the sword, and by bloodshed, the inhabitants of the
> earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquakes, and
> the thunder of Heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall
> the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and
> indignation and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the
> consumption decreed, hath made a full end of all nations;
>
> 7. That the cry of the Saints, and of the blood of the Saints, shall
> cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the earth,
> to be avenged of their enemies.
>
> 8. Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day
> of the Lord come; for behold it cometh quickly, saith the Lord. Amen.

Roughly 11 and a half after this revelation was given by the one true
prophet, the Council of Fifty was organized with an endgame goal of
being the military body that brought all these subjugated classes of
people together to overthrow their white oppressors.

At the meeting of March 19, 1844, just one week after the Council of
Fifty was formed, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith made a speech and it was
recorded by Quilliam:

> E\[lde\]r [Hyrum
> Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#11021551321999688818) followed
> the chairman and said that the time was at hand when the prophecies
> should be fulfilled, when the nations were ready to embrace the
> gospel and when the ensign should be lift up and the standard to the
> people and he believed if we will set up the standard and raise the
> ensign the honest in heart of all nations will immediately begin to
> flock to the standard of our God.

The ensign, the nations ready to embrace the gospel, flock to the
standard of OUR God; all these phrases are the culmination of everything
Mormonism sought to be from its inception and was finally putting into
tangible plans.

After Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith made his remarks, John Taylor made a
few points that showed the intentions of the Council of Fifty didn't
stop at North America.

> Er [John
> Taylor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#4632050838909880551) addressed
> the council on the subject of the filfillment of the prophecies of
> Daniel showing that the time is at hand when the principles of eternal
> truth & righteousness shall
> prevail.[117](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#16800286411708787384) He
> next took a view of the positions and prospects of the different
> nations of the earth. He referred especially to the [United
> States](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#5078051817367201967) [England](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#5932316817794735573),
> Ireland,
> Scotland, [France](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#16249244973315282999), Poland,
> Switzerland, [Germany](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#14635110991051927252) &c...
> concerning the situation of the different nations of the earth showing
> that they were ripe to receive the truth and that it is our duty and
> privilege to put them in possession of it and we are willing to do it.

Theocratic overthrow of the secular government was the intent of the
Council of Fifty, regardless of whether or not it was able to accomplish
those goals. If a guy kills somebody, that's horrible. If a guy attempts
to kill somebody but isn't successful for any reason, the intent is the
same and where the moral judgement should be focused. The Council of
Fifty proved mostly impotent in executing these goals after Jo's death,
but I don't think it's fair to judge the initial intent based on the
final result. The Council of Fifty was Jo's theocratic empire. Full
stop.

Earlier I stated that there were 3 non-Mormon members of Jo's Council of
Fifty. Who were they and why were they there? Why did Jo tell the
Council that it was important to have them and what was their ultimate
fate after Jo's death? The three members are Edward Bonney, Marenus G.
Eaton, and Uriah Brown.

First, let's talk about Edward Bonney. He's in the History of the Church
a few times, a pretty low-level guy. Notably, he was at the trial as the
prosecuting attorney when Jo burned down the Nauvoo Expositor printing
press, which he called a "mock administration of law." Other than that,
Edward Bonney isn't that relevant beyond simply being a non-member who
was loyal to Joseph Smith for his own reasons.

Now let's talk Marenus G. Eaton. This is a fascinating individual and I
think he deserved a place in the Council of Fifty. Marenus Eaton was
allowed to join the Council soon after filing an affidavit on March 27,
1844. This affidavit let Jo know he could trust Marenus Eaton. What did
Eaton's affidavit say?

Vogel HoC 6:309

> \[Eaton\] deposeth and sayeth,... Joseph H. Jackson... Dr. \[Robert
> D.\] Foster and one of the Higbees, I think Cha\[u\]ncey L. Higbee,
> were in the store. The said Joseph H. Jackson, together with the said
> R. D. Foster and said Higbee... invited me into the room where they
> were then sitting. I immediately complied.\
> Soon after I went in, the said Higbee commenced talking about the
> spiritual wife system. He said he had no doubt but some of the Elders
> had ten or twelve apiece. He said they married them whether the
> females were willing or not,...

After which, there's a line in the affidavit that literally says \[Here
follows some expressions too indecent for insertion\]. Then Dr. Bob the
Builder Robert D. Foster told the affiant a story of how these guys are
able to turn wives against their husbands by "trying to poison your
wife's mind against you,". The affidavit continues:

> The \[men\] then remarked that they were about to hold a secret
> meeting to oppose and try to put a stop to such things. The said
> Joseph H. Jackson also said that if any person undertook to arrest him
> he should... cut them.
>
> The said R. D. Foster further said he was afraid of his life and dare
> not be out nights.
>
> The said Higbee said he had not a doubt but there had been men killed
> in Missouri who had secrets that they were afraid they would divulge.
> He said he was afraid of his life.
>
> The said Jackson further said he should not be surprised if there
> should be a real muss and an insurrection in the city in less than two
> months, and that if a disturbance should take place the Carthagenians
> and others would come and help them.

Marenus G. Eaton told Jo about an impending insurrection led by Dr. Bob
the Builder Robert D. Foster, Chauncey L. Higbee, and Joseph H. Jackson,
which went well with another affidavit that day from A.B. Williams which
told about the same conspiracy along with the laws, but also explicitly
says "\[they\] were red hot for conspiracy, and he should not be
surprised if in two weeks there should not be one of the Smith family
left alive in Nauvoo."

Marenus G. Eaton was a double agent. Trusted enough by the conspirators
AND the Council of Fifty leadership that he gained entry into the secret
meetings of both and exchanged information both directions. So, boom, Jo
wanted Eaton in. But, there's another wrinkle to Marenus Eaton, because
in September 1844, the state of New York filed a requisition with the
State of Illinois to arrest and extradite him to New York for.... Wait
for it..... COUNTERFEITING!!! Yes, Eaton was a double agent for Jo and
he was a Bogus maker who helped finance the Mormon empire with
counterfeit coins. He was a star pupil of the Council of Fifty and among
many fellow criminals in those closed-door meetings.

But, Marenus Eaton isn't the most interesting of the 3 non-Mormon
members of the Council of Fifty, that honor goes to Uriah Brown. You
see, Uriah Brown was an inventor, a guy ahead of the technology of his
time, but very forward thinking in his designs. In 1844, Brown was in
his early sixties and he'd probably been an inventor and tinkerer his
whole life. The September 1844 Joseph H. Jackson expose illustrates what
Brown was planning, which illustrates why Jo saw him as such a powerful
non-Mormon ally.

> There was a Mr. Brown, formerly of Rushville, with whom I became
> acquainted in Nauvoo, soon after my arrival there. This man has a
> wonderful genius for invention, and has planned a sub-marine battery
> and steam fire ship, which, to all appearance, is capable of great
> execution. He stated to me, that he had been operating for 21 years,
> in perfecting this work, but had not the means to bring the matter
> before the nation, and that Joe made him a propusition, which had
> caused him to remove to Nauvoo. This proposition was, to furnish the
> means to take him, together with G. A. Adams and Orson Hyde, to
> Russia, where the invention would be laid before the Emperor; and as
> Joe had great faith in its success, he expected a large sum for the
> secret, Which Brown and Joe were to divide.

Brown was using Jo and his incredible resources to get this submarine
invention off the ground. However, Jackson claims that Jo was using
Brown for his own ends that played into a much larger plan.

> This was palmed off on Brown, but was far from being Joe\'s real
> object. His real object, as he disclosed it to me, was this: He would
> first run for President, and thus be be able to prove to the Emperor
> of Russia his strength in the Union. He would then send G. A. Adams,
> Orson Hyde, and Brown to Russia, and after the utility of the
> invention had been fairly proved to the Emperor, Joe\'s proposition to
> him was to be submitted: which was to form a league for the overthrow
> of the powers that be. Now this may seem too ridiculous for any man to
> imagine possible; nevertheless, no one acquainted with the excessive
> vanity of Joe Smith, will doubt but that he in reality believed that
> he could form even so preposterous a union. Joe\'s idea was, that by
> the aid of Brown\'s invention, he could introduce himself to the
> Emperor, and having the strongest faith in the efficiency of the new
> discovery as an instrument of warfare; he imagined, that if His
> Majesty could once see the wonderful work, that he would be willing
> even to take him as a partner in the benefits, for the sake of its
> advantages. As wild as this scheme may seem, it is no wilder than many
> that have characterized Mormonism from its infancy.

Uriah Brown didn't just have plans to build a submarine, but also a
"invention of liquid fire to destroy an army or navy," which Jo VERY
CLEARLY wanted in his hands. A submarine and a flamethrower, we can see
how useful Uriah Brown was to Joseph Smith and why he was the third
non-Mormon member of the Council of Fifty.

Jo intended to use the Council of Fifty in a violent overthrow of the
American Government. The Council provided plenty of tools for him to
accomplish this. In the meeting of March 19, 1844, White-out Willard
Richards presented a resolution to the Council of Fifty that was
approved:

> Resolved that a "communication be made immediately to the General
> Government through our representative, [Mr \[John\]
> Wentworth](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#10182955900818768782),
> specifying that General Joseph Smith will
> protect the [Texas](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#16949087507882652507) and [Oregon](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#15433771420164195180) from
> all foreign invasion if the General Government will authorise him to
> raise volunteers in the [United
> States](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/389#2882013045236126638) for
> that purpose"

What did this resolution actually mean? Well, White-out Willard Richards
sequestered himself away in the evenings to draft it up for presentation
to the High Council, which he did one week later. This is a long read
and I've cut a ton of superfluous information, but there are so many
important nuggets to pull from here so please bear with me. From the
Vogel HoC 6:304-7:

> To the *Honorable*, the *Senate* and *House of Representatives* of the
> Untied States of America, in Congress assembled:
>
> Your memorialist, a free-born citizen of these Untied States,
> respectfully showeth, that from his infancy his soul has been filled
> with the most intense and philanthropic interest for the welfare of
> his native country... he has designed universal peace and goodwill,
> union and brotherly love to all the great family of man, your
> memorialist asks your honorable body to pass the following
>
> ORDINANCE
>
> *An Ordinance for the protection of the citizens of the United States
> emigrating to the adjoining Territories, and for the extension of the
> principles of universal liberty.*
>
> *Whereas*, many of the citizens of these United States have migrated,
> and are migrating to Texas, Oregon, and other lands contiguous to this
> nation;... Joseph Smith has offered and does hereby offer these United
> States, *to* show his loyalty to our confederate Union and the
> constitution of our republic; *to* prevent quarrel and bloodshed on
> our frontier; *to* extend the arm of deliverance to Texas; *to*
> protect the inhabitants of Oregon from foreign aggressions and
> domestic broils; *to* prevent the crowned nations from encircling us
> as a nation on our western and southern border, and save the eagle's
> talon from the lion's paw,... *to* open vast regions of the unpeopled
> west and south to our enlightened and enterprising yeomanry,... *to*
> break down tyranny and oppression and exalt the standard of universal
> peace... *therefore*, that the said memorialist may have the
> privilege, and that no citizen of these United States shall obstruct,
> or attempt to obstruct or hinder, so *good*, so *great*, so *noble* an
> enterprise to carry out those plans and principles as set forth in
> this preamble; and be shielded from every opposition by evil and
> designing men:\--
>
> Sec. 1. Be it *ordained by the Senate and House of Representatives of
> the United States of America, in Congress assembled*, that Joseph
> Smith,... is hereby authorized and empowered to raise a company of one
> hundred thousand armed volunteers,... for the purposes specified in
> the foregoing preamble, and to execute the same.
>
> Sec. 2. *And be it further ordained*, that if any person or persons
> shall hinder or attempt to hinder or molest the said Joseph Smith from
> executing his desings in raising said volunteers and marching or
> transporting the same to the borders of the United States and
> Territories,... shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand
> dollars each for every offense, or by hard labor on some public work
> not exceeding two years.
>
> Sec. 3. *And be it further ordained,*... the said Joseph Smith is
> hereby constituted a member of the army of these United States, and is
> authorized to act as such in the United States and Territories,...
>
> Sec. 4. *And be it further ordained*, that nothing in this ordinance
> shall be so construed by any individual or nation as to consider the
> volunteers aforesaid, as constituting any part of the army of the
> United States;
>
> Sec. 5. *And be it further ordained*, that the said Joseph Smith shall
> confine his operations to those principles of action specified in the
> preamble of this ordinance.
>
> And your memorialist will ever pray, &c.
>
> JOSEPH SMITH

Imagine that. Imagine Joseph Smith with submarines, flamethrowers, and
100,000 American soldiers leading millions of Native Americans and freed
slaves as the one true Mormon army of God. Anybody who opposed or
molested him for any reason, they'd be fined \$1,000 and thrown in labor
camps. As insane as it sounds, there's every indication that this was
Jo's dream. Jo dreamed of overthrowing the government and becoming king
of the world. I dream of owning Jay Leno's collection one day, but it'll
never happen. But, because dreams and final aspirations aren't realistic
doesn't mean we can't learn a lot about a person by understanding what
their unrealistic dreams are. Jo's final dreams would never become a
reality because, let's face it, he could never pull it off, but, once
again, it's the intent here that's truly important. This whole ordeal
reminds me of something I saw in a movie once.

Loveless

Jo, and everybody in those Council of Fifty meetings, knew how dangerous
the meetings were. These were the height of treason against the nation.
This was insurrection. This was the earliest stages of an uprising. If
any member of the government caught wind that these meetings were going
on, that a sovereign theocracy planned to burn the nation to the ground,
the entirety of the U.S. militia forces would descend on Nauvoo before
nightfall. The criminal intent to carry out high treason would land
every one of these guys a slot in the gallows. These were capital
offenses, and the members of the Council of Fifty knew that.

These Minutes recorded by Quilliam Claypen were plutonium. When Jo gave
himself up for arrest and was taken to Carthage prior to the shootout,
he knew that if the Council of Fifty minutes fell in the hands of the
court at his hearing, he'd be taken out back and shot like ol' yeller.
Quilliam's journal tells what Jo commanded him.

June 22, 1844 Joseph whispered and told me either to put the r\[ecords\]
of K\[ingdom\] into the hands of some faithful man and send them away,
or burn them, or bury them. I concluded to bury them, which I did
immediately on my return home.

Then, Carthage happened, Jo and Hyrum were both dead. 7 days after the
Carthage shootout, Quilliam's journal contains this passage.

July 3, 1844 ... at the Temple Office and after went to dig up the
Records. Water had got into the place where they were and they were
damaged.

Quilliam set himself to the task of reconstructing the minutes for days
at a time after that, which were all written into three little
notebooks. These notebooks, along with the records of the Utah-era
Council of Fifty, could burn anybody who touched them and were always
kept tight to the scribe's chest.

Quinn:

> Although the records of the Council of Fifty had been in the personal
> custody of William Clayton as Clerk of the Kingdom in the 1840s, in
> Utah the custody passed among various officers: in 1857 President
> Brigham Young had them in his personal custody and gave them to the
> Church Historian's Office, by 1880 the recorder George Q. Cannon had
> them locked in a box in Utah and took the key with him wherever he
> went, and in 1884 the records were in the possession of reporter
> George F. Gibbs.

All these records survive in the Church's first presidency's vault to
this day. The three little notebooks written by Quilliam remained in
that Vault until the Joseph Smith Papers Project published them in 2016
after over a century of independent scholars and historians frequently
requesting access and being denied nearly every single time.

When Brandon and Heather King gave me this copy of Rogers' Council of
Fifty Documentary History, I didn't know what it was. I didn't know what
I'd find. I honestly didn't know what the Council of Fifty really was.
When I became friends with Joe Geisner at Sunstone 2016, he told me to
be on the lookout for the Council of Fifty minutes being released. At
JWHA in September 2017 in Nauvoo, Joe told me that the Council of Fifty
minutes were an absolute bombshell. I interviewed him along with Bill
Shepherd and Michael Marquardt about the Nauvoo criminal empire and Joe
continued to blow the horn that the Council of Fifty minutes are the
most explosive thing the church has ever published. Ever. I heard him
say the words, but I didn't understand what they really meant until
cracking this book and starting to read the minutes on the JSP.org. The
Council of Fifty, and what transpired there, is earthshattering to
Mormon history.

We can chat all day about how cookey the Book of Abraham is or how there
are anachronisms in the Book of Mormon, those conversations are
worthwhile and they're problematic to the orthodox system of Mormon
belief. The Council of Fifty should shatter every illusion that Joseph
Smith was a good or moral human being. He put into motion plans that
included the slaughter and militaristic subjugation of millions of
Americans. Other explosive documents have been released or opened to
researchers including the Wilford Woodruff journals, the George Q.
Cannon journals, although that last one is pretty strict as to who can
see it, but these journals include redactions. Certain names and events
are redacted, mostly having to do with polygamy and second anointings.
Sure, that's fine, redact away Mormon church, because the most
incredibly explosive and evil material is openly available to every
researcher on the planet with absolutely no redactions. The Council of
Fifty should send a shudder through the body of every believing Mormon
who loves their religion AND their country.

Joseph Smith was an apocalyptic millennialist preacher. Those kinds of
preachers were a dime a dozen in the 19^th^ century and there are even
more of them today. But what sets Jo apart from all his contemporary
apocalypticists is that he didn't just look forward to the end of the
world, he tried to bring the world to an end by himself. He wanted the
world to lay in ruins so Christ could return and reign personally over
the new order that Jo and his acolytes had built on the corpses of any
apostate, gentile, or patriot who opposed them. This bloody Mormon
crusade wasn't just something he dreamed of doing, it was what he
intended on doing. He acted on his dreams. Joseph Smith sought to
condemn and obliterate the American dream of liberty, prosperity, and
freedom of religion because his dreams were better for everyone, even if
attaining those dreams came at a huge cost of human life.

I can't think of a single example in human history where religious
exclusivity forced upon a people by a government was ever a good thing
or better for those living under that heavy theocratic arm. I can think
of absolutely 0 examples where a religious leader crusading and
converting by the sword or artillery cannon was ever a good thing in our
human history. This is Mormon supremacy. The Council of Fifty was the
scaffolding upon which that Mormon supremacy was to be built.

When I introduced this series, I told you that this is arguably the most
important series we've ever done on the show, even moreso than the Book
of Mormon episodes, the Mark Hoffman episodes, the Book of Abraham
episodes, and yes, even more important than episode 1 with the birth of
Joseph Smith. I stand by that assertion. The Council of Fifty deserves
more attention. The role of the Council of Fifty shifts over time,
mostly as a result of Bloody Brigham's insatiable thirst for power, but
for Joseph Smith history, the Council of Fifty weighs heaviest on Jo's
legacy than any other single item. Mormon history is rife with these
issues that should turn any believer's spine into broken glass. Joseph
Smith was a terrifying and evil human being, made all the more insidious
by his approachable and loveable charisma and his complex theology.
Creating a religion is not a moral thing. Joseph Smith was not a moral
human because he was a self-proclaimed prophet. I can scarcely find
examples within his history where he ever acted with a single iota of
selflessness or altruistic morality. The flipside of that is the most
troubling. He wasn't moral when he started his religion, but he utilized
that religion as a weapon to use, abuse, and kill people. His ultimate
goals required the blood sacrifice of millions of people, yet every
Sunday, millions of people sing Praise to this Man who communed with
Jehovah. Yeah, sure, praise to this man, knock yourself out Mormons. I'd
rather spend my life fighting evil than being accessory to it.

Latest Sunstone History Podcast about Smith-entheogen theory

JWHA

Protect LDS Children march October 5, 2019 in SLC
