---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 187 - The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis pt.2'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/ep-187-entheogenic-origins-mormonism-working-hypothesis-pt-2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-187-the-entheogenic-origins-of-mormonism-a-working-hypothesis-pt2
category: History
date: 2019-12-27 04:00:00 +0000
---

Ep 187 -- The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis
pt.2

On this episode, we continue reading through our recently published
article in the Journal of Psychedelics Studies titled "The Entheogenic
Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis". In this segment of the
paper, we discuss many candidate entheogens Joseph Smith may have
employed in the early church as well as the symptomology commonly
associated with these various candidates. Also discussed is Luman
Walters, an occult mentor of Joseph Smith in the 1820s. We utilize the
information established in the candidate psychedelics section to inform
a discussion of the first-vision experience in the early 1820s. An
entheogenic-lens offers an interesting view into certain passages in the
Book of Mormon including multiple instances of death and rebirth
symbology, easily interpreted as the common experience of
ego-dissolution when using entheogens. Further, the therapeutic effects
of mitigating PTSD and depression symptoms may have provided a unique
allure to these plant medicines by Joseph, the entire Smith family, and
the early Mormons.

Find the paper here:\
<https://www.academia.edu/40786304/The_entheogenic_origins_of_Mormonism_A_working_hypothesis>\
<https://akademiai.com/doi/pdf/10.1556/2054.2019.020>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Today's episode is part 2 of reading through The Entheogenic Origins of
Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis. Part 1 constructed an overview of
psychedelics in various occult and esoteric practices, the Smith
family's proficiency with manipulating various plant medicines, Joseph
Smith's fascination with ritualistic practices which often included
entheogens, as well as a framework for a few candidate entheogens
include amanita muscaria mushrooms, ergot fungi, and datura. Part 2
begins with various magical mentors of Joseph Smith, including Luman
Walters who, after his brief affiliation with Mormonism, made his living
from selling plants and herbs as medicine, gaining the label of
physician and surgeon while operating his apothecary storefront. That
section transitions into the many other botanical physicians Smith
surrounded himself with throughout his ministry including Frederick G.
Williams, Willard Richards, and John C. Bennett. The remainder of the
paper dives deep into candidate entheogens, their psychoactive profile,
effects, symptoms, and internally perceived effects. That basis of
information is used to transition into the "first vision" experience of
Joseph Smith in the early 1820s and what can be understood from his
self-reported theophany when viewed through the psychedelic lens. This
portion we're reading on today's podcast ends with the long-lasting and
therapeutic effects of entheogens and why they may have had a certain
appeal to Joseph Smith in light of his upbringing and childhood trauma.
Of course, you'll find a link to the entire paper in the show notes if
you'd like to read along or read it for yourself. With permission from
the Journal of Psychedelic Studies and the other authors of the paper,
let's get started.

**Luman Walters, Occultist and eclectic physician**

Mormon scholar and historian Michael Quinn (1998) reviewed the
historical record about Luman Walters (1789--1860), who was an
accomplished physician, preacher, and magician. Through his travels and
scientific training in France, Germany, and Italy, Walters became an
"eclectic" physician whose practices involved occult techniques that
included the administration of medicinal herbs he processed in his
well-stocked laboratory. Walters was an exceptionally qualified mentor.
During Joseph Smith's teen years and early twenties, Walters utilized
his occult training as an astrologer and seer for treasure companies,
one of which was a "fraternity" of rodsmen, with Joseph Sr. as one of
the leading members. During this period, Walters was young Joseph's
"constant companion and bosom friend" and given Smith's extraordinary
level of intelligence, he readily received Walters' teachings and
eventually exceeded his skills as a conjurer and scryer (Cole, 1831).

*Esoteric practice*

Walters used a seer stone, conjuration, animal sacrifice, and likely a
hallucinogen to occasion "interview with the spirit, supposed to have
the custody of \[a particular\] hidden treasure" (Quinn, 1998). It was
Walters who "first suggested to Joseph the idea of finding a book."
Occasionally, Walters could be found reading to a receptive audience
from an "old book" in a language that only he could understand and
prophesied that Joseph Jr. "was about to find ::: a history of hidden
treasures" and a "record of the former inhabitants of America" (Cole,
1831; Morgan, 2014). Joseph Jr. was chosen as a treasure seer by the
same company that had hired Walters, leaving him angry and resentful
(Kane, 1995). Residents believed Walters' mantle fell on the young
Joseph. While acting as a seer for this company, Smith announced that he
found golden plates containing a history of Amerindian ancestors, from
which he subsequently "translated" The Book of Mormon. Smith used a seer
stone to translate, and we hypothesize an entheogen; the use of the
latter is suggested by reports of his frequent "intoxication" or
"altered" appearance while translating. Luman Walters and Joseph
reconciled because Walters was later reported to be a "disciple" of
Joseph Smith in Kirtland, Ohio, suggesting Walters' direct impact on
Mormon visionary experience could extend into the early Kirtland period
at least (Quinn, 1998, p. 131). Walters likely received his esoteric
training, including alchemical-drug expertise while studying in Europe
(see below). The esoteric physician's involvement in Mormonism was
confirmed by Brigham Young, one of Joseph Smith's successors (Young,
1858). Joseph Smith's alchemical-masonic amulet suggests Walter's
drug-alchemical influence in Smith's early career (see below).

*Medical practice*

Walters' medical practice fared much better than his seership duties. He
secured his medical reputation by curing a child of severe "croup" after
traditional physicians had, in despair, given up. Croup was "the common
term for every affection of the windpipe," stridor that produced a
high-pitched crowing sound on exhalation. Porter (1826) notes that
antiphlogistics (anti-inflammatories) were used by all physicians of the
period, as were opium (Papaver somniferum) and Atropa belladonna and D.
stramonium, both of which contain hallucinogenic anticholinergic
alkaloids (Hartshorne, 1855). Operating his laboratory, Walters could
isolate the active anticholinergic component of the Datura plant as an
extract or a tincture. He would know the appropriate doses to treat:
respiratory diseases such as asthma, cough-variant asthma, and to
relieve pain from sciatica, menstruation, and cancer (Benich & Carek,
2011). Datura was well known, and "Indeed, so closely does it resemble
belladonna, that even, in the intoxication which it produces, the same
follies are committed." The effects of this plant are well-known in some
parts of Europe, and the plant was vulgarly called "Herbe aux Sorciers"
(Thomson, 1832) and was "commonly connected with witchcraft, death, and
horror" (Folkard, 1884). Walters undoubtedly used anticholinergics such
as A. belladonna, D. stramonium, and Hyoscyamus niger as treatments and
knew of their use as visionary substances. He may have also known the
antidepressant properties of anticholinergic-facilitated experience and
used these medicines to treat melancholy (Drevets, Zarate, & Furey,
2013). Further suggesting that Walters prescribed psychoactives is a
statement in the following report in the Geneva (NY) Times,

> *"In the olden days, roots, herbs and vegetables were considered
> highly essential as medicine for nervous disorders by a number of
> physicians. Among the early physicians to use these ingredients in his
> prescriptions for nervous disorders was Dr. Luman Walters, a noted
> physician and surgeon who practiced in the village of Gorham over a
> half-century ago" (Anon., 1929).*

Walters would have brought from Europe the medical and occult books from
which he taught and perhaps loaned to the Smiths. Anyone with access to
The Magus, such as Walters and the Smiths did, would read recipes
describing hallucinogenic anticholinergics, or "herbs of the spirits"
that could be smoked, used orally, dermally, or intravaginally.
Ceremonial magicians in both Europe and America used visionary
substances. Dale Pendell notes that included in John Porta's book
Natural Magick, published in 1558, "a number of recipes both for
sleeping potions and madness potions, using stramonium (Datura),
belladonna, and henbane. Natural Magick was an immediate best-seller"
(Pendell, 2005, p. 244). Weirus includes "nightshade" in his visionary
formula. Although nightshade can be a generic term for members of the
Solanaceae family, including the Solanum genus of food plants such as
tomato, potato, and eggplant, it could also be a term for highly toxic
Bittersweet (Solanum dulcamara), or woody nightshade, with purple and
yellow flowers and red ovoid berries (Evens & Stellpflug, 2012).

**Frederick G. Williams, Apothecary**

One early convert to Mormonism living in Kirtland was a
second-generation German immigrant named Frederick G. Williams. Born in
October 1787, Williams took up the practice of medicine around 1816
after the death of his sister-in-law during childbirth. Williams
gravitated towards Thomsonianism medicine and was frequently called an
"herbal" or "vegetable" doctor. However, Williams (2012) did not limit
his practice to herbal medicine; his skill set included setting
fractured bones, suturing wounds, and treating burns, cholera, venereal
disease, and delivering newborns (Williams, 2012, pp. 10, 15, 159, 162,
167). If Williams followed Samuel Thomson's (1841) Materia Medica, which
was in its 13th edition, he would have given enemas to assist with
childbirth (p. 698), and if needed, given a tea consisting of raspberry
leaves and "No. 2," the later signifying the class of medicinal
stimulants found in London and Edinburgh Dispensatories (p. 115). Since
1822, ergot of rye was thought "to be the most efficacious remedy in
cases of protracted labor and excessive hemorrhage" and by 1838, was
"was available in every dispensary in London" (Bauer, 1838, p.479).
Favoring herbs himself, Smith had great sympathy for this branch of
medical practice. Soon after his induction into the religion, Smith
appointed Williams to the office of Second Counselor to the Prophet,
Smith's scribe, and printer for church publications. As a physician,
Williams was "universally known through this country as an eminent and
skillful man" saving Samuel Smith's wife in childbearing and reviving
the newborn child (Williams, 1972). Fellow physicians living in Nauvoo
used ergot in the obstetrical practices and we have no reason to believe
that Williams' skills were any different.

*Indian Mission*

One aspect of Williams' involvement in early Mormonism was his mission
journey to proselytize to the Native Americans from late 1830--1831.
Joseph Smith revealed to Oliver Cowdery and three other Elders they were
to commence their missionary efforts to the Lamanite, as Smith called
Native Americans Indians (Smith, 1833, p. 68) and scout the location for
a satellite "stake" (or congregation) to be organized in Missouri.
During this journey, the missionaries met Williams, and he joined the
group to meet with, and proselytize to, the Natives near modern Kansas
City, Missouri, in a Native settlement known as Kaw Township. For a
botanically centric physician, an opportunity to meet with the so-called
"Lamanites" and intermingle knowledge of herb craft and mysticism with
the people who had been using American plants for millennia would have
been an exciting prospect. Dr. Williams' medical practice later reflects
this newfound knowledge of "Indian medicine," as evidenced by multiple
advertisements Williams published in the Quincy Whig from 1839 to 1842
(Williams, 2012, p. 169). The overwhelming logistical constraints of
supplying scores or hundreds of Mormons on multiple occasions with
various plant medicines could have been satisfied by an experienced
Thomsonian Botanical physician like Frederick G. Williams, with his
herbarium. As evidence of their close fraternity, Joseph Smith named one
of his children after Frederick G. Williams. Smith had a strong and
previously unremarked tendency to draw physicians close to him and place
them in positions of close confidence. Smith began his career as a seer
with botanical physician Luman Walters as his mentor, and later made
Frederick Williams one of his top two or three confidants. In the early
1830s, Smith ordained him his counselor in the newly organized First
Presidency. In the early 1840s, he made physician Willard Richards an
apostle and his private secretary. Also, around the same time, he made
physician John Cook Bennett a counselor in the First Presidency and
arguably his right-hand man and closest companion in the early 1840s.

Let's break this down for a minute. The influence of John C. Bennett and
Willard Richards on Joseph Smith in Nauvoo is quite notable. I, however,
take a particular interest in Frederick G. Williams. We've discussed him
a bit on this show and devoted an entire episode to just Williams when
he passed away from our timeline. Not only was he an herbal physician
with an herbarium on either side of his house, as noted by Eber D. Howe
in Mormonism Unvailed, but he was also one of the earliest converts to
the church, was a counselor in the first presidency, one of the first
missionaries, the Kirtland temple was built partially on his land, and
he was Joseph Smith's scribe personally penning nearly 100 of Joseph's
revelations. This guy was always next to Joseph throughout the majority
of Smith's ministry. Also, when Joseph Smith moved to Kirtland in early
1831, Frederick G. Williams split his time between the Kirtland
headquarters and Zion in Missouri. Due to being absent, somebody had to
keep running his herbarium, and Joseph Sr. was given the job. Sr.
continued to control the herbarium for most of the time they lived in
Kirtland until the mass exodus to Missouri in 1838. Why is Frederick G.
Williams so paramount to the Smith-entheogen theory? He seems like the
guy. If Joseph Smith was facilitating visionary and mystical experiences
using psychedelics, he alone could have scavenged or cultivated the
necessary plants in the earliest days of the church. However, as the
church grew, so did Smith's daily duties and the time required to
scavenge the forest for, or personally cultivate, enough plant materials
would have grown pretty thin. Smith needed a regular supplier who could
provide entheogenic materials year-round. So, Williams, who owned
greenhouses on his farm right next to the temple was immediately
elevated to the second-highest governing body in the church and Joseph
Sr. takes over the greenhouse operation. Williams had the knowhow and
land to provide the necessary plant medicines, as would have Joseph Sr.,
and the early Kirtland church suddenly had access to a nearly limitless
supply of ecstatic and spiritual experiences. Nobody would dispute that
of the visionary era of Joseph Smith Mormonism, Kirtland was the most
visionary where these phenomena make the most frequent and incredible
appearances and Smith seemed to have yet to learn that these practices
are better conducted in secret. Also worth noting, Williams and his
wife, Rebecca, were incessant record-keepers. Williams's ledger books,
while they don't provide his recipes or standard practices, reveal a
small window into what services and products he provided to the Mormons.
In addition to sewing up Hyrum Smith's arm after a wood-chopping
accident, Williams provided medicine for all sorts of maladies. One of
his products, of which he seems to have sold a lot in Nauvoo, was
"bachelor's delight". What bachelors delight was is up for speculation
but a few different classes of plant medicine could fit the criteria and
would have come particularly in handy for Nauvoo polygamy. It could be
as simple as a pain cure for venereal disease, or it could have been an
aphrodisiac, abortifacient, or used to render a person's sober
faculties, inhibitions, or memory less effective. I'll let you, dear
listener, consider the purposes for those drugs. All said, Williams
certainly is a crucial piece to the Smith-entheogen theory but it should
also be noted that he wasn't the only herbal physician in Mormon
leadership and certainly not in the wider common membership. Williams's
age took a toll on him and he died soon after the exodus from Missouri
to Nauvoo. By that time Joseph Smith had other botanical physicians in
his closest circle including Willard Richards and John C. Bennett, who's
long been the focus of accusations concerning abortions in Nauvoo
especially due to him owning a brothel in the city before the membership
were fed up with him and his brothel and tossed the building into a
ditch. For roughly 20 months, Joseph Smith and John C. Bennett were
inseparable and even shared the same Nauvoo home for over a year, taking
meals together, attending meetings together, preaching from the same
pulpits, and riding around town in the same carriages together. Smith
always had an herbal physician within arm's reach.

ENTHEOGENIC MATERIALS

The availability of entheogenic material to the Smith family and their
ability to process and utilize it are foundational to our thesis of an
entheogenic early Mormonism. Sources of entheogens available to the
Smith family and other herbalists interested in divination, visions, and
spiritual ecstasies included D. stramonium, A. muscaria variation
guessowii, Psilocybe ovoideocystidiata, and C. purpurea. Moreover, with
established trade networks extending into southwestern Texas, Smith
Joseph Smith potentially had access to two additional entheogens,
Lophophora williamsii and Incilius alvarius.

***D. stramonium and H. niger***

Two prominent members of the Solanaceae plant family were available in
the areas the Smith family domiciled, D. stramonium (Jimson weed or
Jamestown weed) and H. niger (Black henbane). The Drug Enforcement
Administration (2013) reports datura plants growing wild, as
ornamentals, and in herbal gardens throughout much of the United States
from the northeastern states to Texas; and the USDA plant database shows
both D. stramonium and H. niger growing in extensive areas across the
entire Northeastern states and other areas in the country. Both plants
contain the tropane alkaloid deliriants atropine, hyoscyamine, and
scopolamine and are among the oldest medicines known to humankind (Sweta
& Lakshmi, 2015); physicians used them since antiquity as effective
medicinals in Eurasia (Alizadeh, Moshiri, Alizadeh, & Balali-Mood,
2014), and early post-colonial America (Ashe, 1808; Coxe, 1827, pp.
209--210). Datura, for example, was used for its analgesic,
antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory, and antihelmintic properties (Soni,
Siddiqui, Dwivedi, & Soni, 2012). Antithetically, 19th-century
clinicians reported successfully treating a case of a chronic delusional
state with a 10-day course of carefully prescribed D. stramonium
(Sigmond, 1849). Magico-religious practitioners also used hyoscyamine
and scopolamine since antiquity (Muller, 1998), primarily to facilitate
visions and ecstasies during divinatory and shamanic healing ceremonies,
religious rituals, and witchcraft (Busia & Heckels, 2006; Keller & Kane,
1967). Anticholinergics were also used as an anesthetic by the Greek
physician, Pediacus Dioscorides (c. 40 -- 90 AD), and noted by the Roman
encyclopedist, Aulus Celcus (c. 25 BC -- c. 50 AD). In the earliest
attempts at general anesthesia, wine extractions of the bark of the root
of mandrake, and the seeds of opium and henbane were used to cause "dead
sleep" so the patient "not apprehend the pain" of surgery (Carter,
1996). The properties of datura were also well-known among colonials
living in 18th-century Boston (Meyers, 2011, p. 40). During the 1676
rebellion by Virginia settlers, "hungry \[British\] soldiers consumed
the plant and then hallucinated for eleven days" (p. 58). This same
symptomology will return in 1830--1831 Kirtland.

***P. ovoideocystidiata***

P. ovoideocystidiata (Figure 15) mushroom ranges from Rhode Island to
Kentucky and is especially common in the Ohio River valley (Guzmán,
Gaines, & Ramírez-Guillén, 2007). These mushrooms are usually harvested
from April to mid-June but sometimes persist into late September or
early November and have a farinaceous or flour-like taste, possibly
making ground-up mushroom concealable in bread. Psilocybin-containing
mushrooms have different pharmacology than A. muscaria and historically
are a major entheogen in cultures worldwide. When ingested, psilocybin
content of these mushrooms is dephosphorylated into the psychoactive
compound psilocin, explaining why these fungi "have been exploited for
their psychotropic effects since prehistoric times" (Guzman, 2009).
Psilocybe species mushrooms are best known for their entheogenic use in
pre-Columbian Mexico, where they were used at least the last 2,000
years. Psilocybe mushroom use extends back to 6000 BP in Europe and to
7000 BP in Africa (Ruiz, Piper, & Ruck, 2011).

***Amanita muscaria***

A. muscaria var. guessowii mushrooms, such as the one shown growing near
Kirtland, Ohio in Figure 16, are widely distributed in the woodlands and
forests of Northeastern America, where it is recognizable by its yellow
to yellow-- orange cap with remnants of the universal veil forming white
scales and a skirt about its stem (Ostry, Anderson, & O'Brien, 2010). It
fruits in enormous quantities, often attaining dinner-plate size, and
can be found growing in a circle or "fairy ring" around its host tree.
The fairy ring can be striking in appearance, especially as the mushroom
matures and takes on a golden color, enhanced by the early morning or
evening light (Heinrich, 2002, plate 36). The cap contains ibotenic acid
and muscimol, with the more hallucinogenic and less toxic muscimol
content increasing as the mushroom dries. A. muscaria may be the oldest
entheogen known with some believing its use began after the "last Ice
Age in the northern Eurasian forest belt \[and\] spread north following
the retreating polar ice cap, approximately 11,000 B.P."
(HajicekDobberstein, 1995. p. 100) and used as an entheogen by Siberian
shaman for millennia (Lee, Dukan, & Milne, 2018). Further, Indo-European
speaking groups developed "a vocabulary pertaining to its shamanic use"
followed centuries later by the "priests of the Vedic culture \[who\]
sang hymns in praise of Soma the god, the sacred plant and the sacred
drink pressed from the plant" (Ibid). It appears from the 2nd to the
9th-century CE among "Buddhist adepts ::: \[who\] may have been
ingesting this mushroom" as an entheogen (Ibid). A. muscaria use appears
in alchemy, Christianity, and among free and adept masons; we argue that
it appears in the dreams and visions of the Joseph Smith family.

***C. purpurea (ergot and mushroom)***

The physicians Luman Walters, Frederic G. Williams, and John C. Bennett
(see below) may have provided Joseph Smith with visionary ergot. In
Figure 17, soft white sphacelia (tissue) is producing sugary or
honey-tasting honeydew (Shelley, 1995). The darkly colored sclerotium in
Figure 18, when mature, drops to the ground. When there is moisture,
ergot on the ground germinates, forming mushroom-like fruiting bodies
(stromas) with stipes and heads of various colors in Figure 19. The
non-water-soluble ergopeptine alkaloids "were the agents responsible for
the recurring plagues of ergotism known throughout European history"
(Webster, Perrine, & Ruck, 2000, p. 8). The same alkaloids were used by
physicians since the 16th century to stimulate uterine contraction to
hasten childbirth, to stop post-partum hemorrhage, or to induce abortion
(Scarborough, 1971). Use of ergot for these purposes included 1840s
Nauvoo, Illinois where it was available to Mormon physicians. William
Shelley (1995) argues that ergot use as an entheogen can be "traced
through the Greco-Roman World, through the worship of Mithra and the
Hebrew Scriptures into the activities of the early Christians and from
there to the 'hidden tradition' of alchemy'" (Marshall, 1999).
Water-soluble psychoactive alkaloids from C. purpurea (ergot) include
ergonovine and methylergonovine (Webster et al., 2000, p. 2). These
alkaloids are believed to constitute the kykeon elixir of the greater
Greek Eleusinian mysteries (Wasson et al., 2008). Peter Webster argues
that "Greek priests could easily have harvested enough ergot \[0.5 kg\]
from the nearby barley fields \[to serve\] 1000 Eleusis participants"
(Webster et al., 2000, p. 8).

> *"Hierophantic priests might well have discovered how to achieve
> partial hydrolysis of the most toxic alkaloids of C. purpurea,
> resulting in an extract of ergot containing a blend of
> psychedelic\[s\] ::: eliminat\[ing\] the toxic ergopeptine alkaloids,
> converting them to psychoactive ergine and isoergine ::: closely
> similar to the Aztec's ololiuqui"* (Ibid, p. 7), LSD, or psilocybin
> (Wasson, Kramrish, Ott, & Ruck, 1986).

The life cycle of ergot lends itself to allegory in esoteric
Judeo-Christian as it does in spiritual alchemy and masonry. For
instance, the manna which Moses said came from heaven tastes "like
wafers \[made\] with honey" (Exodus 16:14, "KJV"), a description
consistent with ergot's honeydew stage. While undetected ergot infects
bread and causes disease, water-soluble alkaloids can be added to bread,
making it an entheogenic Hebrew sacrament. Consistent with entheogenic
use of ergot, Moses tells the tribes of Israel that manna is "the bread
which the Lord hath given you to eat" (Exodus 16:15), a theme echoed in
the Christian era when Jesus says here is the "bread of life" (John
6:30, "KJV"). Figure 20 shows frame from the ca. 1200 Great Canterbury
Salter, in Canterbury, England, titled "God Creates Plants" showing God
with four mushroom-appearing figures below him; all five figures have
uplifted hands seeming to mirror each other. This medieval salter
reveals esoteric Christianity's fascination with entheogenic mushrooms.
In this figure, God appears to wear an A. muscaria cap showing its gill
side down, while the left-most figure appears to be a stylized Psilocybe
mushroom and the farright figure appears to represent the stromata of an
ergot fungus sclerotium. The dark, purplish sclerotium in Figure 18 that
has replaced a grain of rye will remain dormant for an extended time if
harvested, or fall to the ground. The grounded sclerotium will
eventually be moistened by rain or irrigation and produce stroma
resembling tiny mushrooms in Figure 19, while Figure 21 is an
enlargement of a stroma showing its yellowish-red stippled head
comparable to the head of the rightmost mushroom figure in the salter
frame. A Mason and early Mormon convert, John C. Bennett, was a
practicing physician and obstetrician. There is circumstantial evidence
that Bennett, accused of administering "medicine" to induce abortion,
was familiar with the medical uses of ergot (Hedges & Smith, 2010).
Luman Walters or Frederick G. Williams likely had the education and
practical training to cultivate, harvest, and prepare the psychoactive
materials associated with ergot for the Kirtland temple. Bennett would
have been qualified to safely prepare visionary ergot as a ceremonial
entheogen in the Nauvoo temple.

***L. williamsii (peyote)***

During the period of Indian Removal beginning in 1830, Native Americans
living east of the Mississippi River passed through Nauvoo on their way
to their seasonal hunting grounds. Potawatomi delegations, also often
including members of the Fox and Sauk nations, visited Joseph Smith
between April 18 and August 28 of 1843 (discussed below). The purpose of
these negotiations is not altogether clear to historians. However, as we
will see, the negotiations probably involved Joseph Smith giving
valuable and sacred property to the Potawatomi without apparent gain to
Smith in return. We suggest that Joseph Smith may have negotiated with
Native Americans for the delivery of peyote to Nauvoo for the Nauvoo
temple endowment. Peyote (L. williamsii) in Figure 22 grows along the
Mexican--Texas border and has been used in Native American
magico-religious ceremonies for millennia (Bruhn, De Smet, El-Seedi, &
Beck, 2002). "Indians regard the \[peyote\] as a panacea in medicine, a
source of inspiration. Moreover, \[it is\] the key which opens to him
all the glories of another world" (Stewart, 1974, 1987). In aboriginal
time, the peyote cult was among the Uto-Aztecan tribes (Slotkin, 1955,
p. 203), and perhaps even earlier "in the Mesoamerican and Greater
Southwest cultural superareas" (Ibid, p. 204), and among "tribes
adjacent to those of the United States: Pima, Opata, Jumano, Lagunero,
and Coahuilteco" (Ibid, pp. 206--207). The diffusion of peyotism
northeastward occurred in stages beginning to the "Old Peyote Complex"
of Mexico before the Spaniards arrived in the 16th century, eventually
culminating in the Plains Indian Peyote Religion in the late 19th
century (Slotkin, 1955, p. 28; Troike, 1962). The map in Figure 23 shows
the location of the peyote beds (dark gray) and the Indian tribes (light
gray) who were practicing peyotism before 1800 (Slotkin, 1955, p. 207).
When Joseph Smith sent Lyman Wight to Texas to establish Mormon
colonies, he would have been in contact with both the source of peyote
and Native Americans expert in its use. After the Spaniards took control
of what is now Mexico in 1571, peyote cults were suppressed by priests
of the Catholic Inquisition, who nearly eradicated peyote rituals. An
Inquisition document of 1620 outlines Catholic opposition to the ancient
Amerindian religion and its peyote sacrament:

> *" ::: peyote has been introduced into these provinces for the
> purposes of detecting thefts, of divining other happenings and of
> foretelling future events, it is an act of superstition,
> condemned---as opposed to the purity and integrity of our Holy
> Catholic faith. The fantasies suggest the intervention of the Devil,
> the real authority of this vice" (Rudgley, 1993, p. 75).*

Peyote cult recovery first took place among the Huichol (discussed
below) and Tarahumara tribes. Peyote use among Mescaleros and Lipan
Apache likely had its origin in the late 18th century with "the Apache
making one ritual complex from features selected from the totality of
the Mexican and Spanish religious and ceremonial life they knew"
(Stewart, 1948, pp. 35--36). Also, Åke Hultkrantz (1997, p. 31) argued
there are "reasons to assume that Mexican tribal Peyote ritualism
constituted the transition to the Plains Peyote rite, and thereby to the
modern Peyote religion" with intermediates being the Comanche, Kiowa,
and Kiowa Apache. Further, there is evidence of peyote use by Lipan
Apache in the 1770s. It would be naive to believe that Plains Indians
shaman, medicine men, or doctors would not have been interested in
peyote long before the establishment of Peyote religion. Why would
Joseph Smith be interested in peyote that requires an overland journey
of 1,300 miles through Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Indian Territory
before arriving in the peyote fields? We suggest that Smith heard of
"aspects of peyotism" and its visionary properties as information made
its way east, until in 1835, there were "European \[peyote\] cactus
fanciers" (Slotkin, 1955, p. 208).

Typifying Native American's feelings about peyote, Comanchero war chief
Quanah Parker once spoke of the advantage peyote offered Native American
religion over those in the United States:

> *The white man goes into his church house and talks about Jesus, but
> the Indian goes into his tipi and talks to Jesus" ::: \[and the
> Indians received\] "their inspiration from the Great Father, while the
> white man \[received\] his through the book they have." (Hagan, 1995,
> p. 56)*

Joseph Smith, who had promised converts visions of God, would have been
naturally interested in the ceremonial use of peyote for Mormon rituals.
Below we discuss evidence he sought to obtain peyote.

**Incilius alvarius (Sonoran Desert toad)**

One of the most dramatic religious experiences found in the "Tree of
Life" dream accounts reported by Joseph Sr. and recorded in The Book of
Mormon by Joseph Jr. may be facilitated by smoking parotid gland
secretions of the Sonoran Desert toad (I. alvarius) shown in Figure 24
and found in the same general area as peyote (see Figures 23 and 25
below). According to Lyttle, Goldstein, and Gartz (1996),

> *"Bufo toad (and related genera) has held a place in humanity's
> archaic consciousness since time immemorial. The earliest
> representations of Bufo toads (and toads generally) go back thousands
> of years. The appearance of toad-based artifacts is prehistoric were
> portrayed in ancient pictographs, paintings, and sculpture" (p. 268).*

Secretions harvested from the parotid glands of I. alvarius are rich in
highly entheogenic 5-MeODMT (Barsuglia et al. 2018; Griffiths, 2018).
Evidence suggests that 5-MeO-DMT, harvested from I. alvarious, was an
entheogen used by the Olmec, Mayan and especially the Aztec
civilizations where "Aztec icons focus in great detail on the Bufo
toad's parotid glands, which contain substances that may be trance
inducing" (Lyttle et al., 1996, p. 269). The I. alvarius in Figure 24
bears a striking resemblance to preColumbian stone toad effigies such as
the toad effigy with the Mayan Sun-God carved on its back from Northern
Guatemala or Southeastern Mexico, in Figure 26, and the stone pipe toad
effigy from the Ohio Hopewell Culture in Figure 27.

Early critics of Mormonism linked magical toads with Joseph Smith. For
instance, a neighbor of the Smiths, Willard Chase, reported that in
1827, Joseph Smith's father related the following story: Some years ago
a spirit had appeared to Joseph, his son, in a vision, and informed him
that in a certain place there was a record on plates of gold ::: \[and
that\] he must repair to the place where was deposited this manuscript
::: \[Joseph Smith repaired to the place\] opened the box, and in it saw
the book, and ::: something like a toad (Howe, 1834, p. 242) The
subsequent transformation of the toad described by Chase strongly
suggests an entheogenic source for this vision. Further, in 1830, the
year Joseph Smith finished his "translation" of the "plates of gold,"
his occult mentor, Luman Walters reportedly possessed a stuffed toad
(Quinn, 1998, p. 117), a common familiar of a conjurer (Ermacora, 2017).
Walters, who traveled in Europe, would have known the toad's magical and
possibly hallucinogenic properties. According to Lyttle et al. (1996),
the more "purely psychedelic applications of the Bufo toad had to do
with the so-called toad stone, supposedly found in the head \[parotid
gland?\] of the Bufo toad ::: In 1644 \[France\], Boetious de Boot, in
his Parfait Joallier \[Perfect Jeweler\], described 'the toad stone'
alleged 'to exist in the toads head ::: another sure talisman for
obtaining perfect Earthly happiness.'" The twice mentioned "toad" during
the production of The Book of Mormon suggests the remote possibility
that Smith employed a toad entheogen in its writing. Further, the
happiness mentioned by Boetious de Boot is a significant sequela of many
early Mormon visions discussed below. For Joseph Smith to have used toad
5-MeO-DMT, it would have had to been smoked or snuffed. Further, I.
alvarius entheogen would have had to be transported from Southwest Texas
(Figure 25) along existing Indian trade routes into the American
Northeast (Tanner, 1996, see map by Sanderson Associates). Peyote, found
in Texas (Figure 25), retains its potency (2% mescaline) over thousands
of years (Terry, Steelman, Guilderson, Dering, & Rowe, 2006),
while5-MeO-DMT retains its potency over a much shorter period. Although
no literature indicated how long and at what temperatures, 5-MeO-DMT
remains active, if it is like is cousin, N, N-dimethyltryptamine, its
salts retain their potency significantly longer than when kept in
solution. Presuming this entheogen remained active between harvesting,
arrival in the Midwest, and use, a stuffed toad with 5-MeO-DMT could
easily supply the needs of a magician or seer for a prolonged period or
a small congregation of believers for a year. Further 5-MeO-DMT would be
an attractive entheogen for Joseph Smith due to its immediate and
profound antidepressant properties (Davis, So, Lancelotta, Barsuglia, &
Griffiths, 2018). Had Joseph Smith known the features of entheogenic
toad venom, he would have undoubtedly arranged for its procurement and
transport to Nauvoo in the 1840s. Further, in 1844, Joseph Smith
instructed fellow Mormons to settle the region surrounding the Rio
Grande River. One follower, Lyman Wight (referenced below) went to
Midwestern Texas to form the Mormon colony of Zodiac (Langford &
Bandera, 2003), a site within easy traveling distance to both the peyote
beds and the Sonoran Deseret Toad catchment area. Figure 25 also shows
the area where the distribution of L. williamsii and Native American
expertise in peyote sacraments and medicine overlapped with the proposed
Mormon territory.

These are our primary candidates of entheogens in this Smith-entheogen
theory. We can demonstrate access to most of them and people moved
around America and traded objects and commodities with surprising speed
in the 19^th^-century. When I was introducing the paper in last week's
episode I said that we're taking a bit of a shotgun approach, this is
where that shotgun approach comes into play. We have our shining
candidates of Datura and Amanita Muscaria, those would be our best
arguments. However, with this paper we're trying to put forward more
good arguments instead of fewer best arguments. For example, the sonoran
desert toad is pretty tough to demonstrate Smith could possibly have
access to it beyond Luman Walters having a stuffed toad when he was
Smith's mentor and the possibility of the spirit guardian of the plates
starting as a toad which transformed into an angel and threw Smith a few
rods from the location of the entombed plates. There can be no mistake
that Luman Walters had a heavy influence on Joseph Smith at this time
and he represents the primary candidate for occult instructor who would
have educated Smith on the occult uses of entheogens. This is primarily
where the hexing herbs or witching ointments come into play. Datura,
Henbane, Mandrake, Hemlock, most of these are nightshades but they all
fall under the category of witching ointments or hexing herbs for their
frequent implementation in esoteric practices. The occult philosophers
of the day, Ebenzer Sibley, Francis Barret, Henry Cornelius Agrippa, all
of these writers devoted extensive portions of their occult books to the
use of herbs, all of which included something about these very specific
plants with a very specific psychoactive profile. They could be smoked
to aid in conjuration, prophecy, divination, spirit communication, and
all these esoteric arts. They could be infused in a topical ointment for
healings, or astral projection, inserted into the anus or vagina to fly
through the celestial spheres unknown to uninitiated eyes. These plants
were tools to see a world our mortal eyes can't comprehend. Let's talk
briefly about peyote as well. Peyote has a fascinating history in
European-American culture. It was harvested and sold across the nation
throughout the majority of the 19^th^ century largely via indigenous
tribes. It has a fascinating medicinal profile with very few negative
external symptoms both during the dosage effectiveness time space and
after. Peyote likely only made its appearance in Smith's psychoactive
toolbox near the very end of his life as his meetings with Native
Americans became more frequent from 1841 to 1844. He also commissioned
various missionaries to make their way to Texas to scope out a location
for a new Mormon settlement on the Rio Grande, which is the only place
in America the peyote cactus grows. Lucian Woodworth returned from this
mission with intel and a larger settlement expedition was planned at
Smith's direction and he tasked Lyman Wight with the task. Smith died in
June of 1844 before Lyman Wight could carry out the mission, but Wight
still created the Mormon settlement just north of San Antonio on the
Pedernales River, which was only a week's long journey to ride to the
Rio Grande, harvest peyote buttons, and return to Zodiac which could
then supply other Mormon settlements via the Pedernales to the Colorado
River and over land from that point. We have no documentation stating
explicitly that Wight's mission to Texas had the intention of creating a
peyote highway but the location and timing of Lyman Wight's settlement
mission sure present and interesting prospect when viewed through the
Smith-entheogen lens. It is also notable that Joseph Smith's grandson,
Frederick M. Smith, who was prophet of the RLDS from 1915 to 1945, wrote
his doctoral thesis on ecstatic and spiritual experiences which included
and entire chapter on peyote. He was also a relatively frequent user of
the psychedelic throughout his life. That's getting a little ahead of
the story because we flesh it out near the conclusion of the paper so
let's continue and get there when we get there.

SHAMANIC TRANSFORMATION

We have discussed mentors for Joseph Smith, which we believe knew
entheogens and employed them in his mentoring. Overwhelming childhood
trauma suffered by Joseph Smith facilitated his formation as a shaman
prophet of a successful new religion, enabling the use of entheogens to
their maximum religious potential.

**Unimaginable childhood trauma**

Groesbeck (1990, 2004, 2005), a Jungian trained psychiatrist, has argued
that the shamanic-healer archetype aptly describes Joseph Smith's
personality structure. Groesbeck, who studied with a Huichol shaman,
agreed with Mircea Eliade (1964) that the shaman's role and function
depended on their techniques of facilitating ecstasy. According to
Eliade, a shamanic healer's abilities in ecstasy or trance, to enter
"into contact with divine or semidivine beings" (p. 84) and to "consort
with the dead with impunity" (p. 214), generally resulted from severe
trauma during early life. This shamanic complex and its archetypal
pattern result from a severe illness early in life and strenuous ordeals
(Groesbeck, 1975, 1989). Joseph endured such an ordeal at age 7 when
stricken with life-and limb-threatening osteomyelitis secondary to
typhoid fever (Adams, 2013; Morain, 1998, 2013; Wirthlin, 1981). In a
horrific and prolonged ordeal, the young Joseph Smith (1833) suffered
multiple exquisitely painful surgical procedures without the benefit of
anesthesia or sedation. One might get a sense of what this 7-year-old
boy must have endured in a revealing revelation: I \[God\] command you
\[to\] repent, lest I smite you ::: and your sufferings be sore. How
sore you know not! How exquisite you know not! Yea, how hard to bear you
know not! (Smith, 1833, p. 23) The appalling nature of young Joseph's
surgeries, documented by physician LeRoy Wirthlin, is incomprehensible
except to those who have experienced them (Wirthlin, 1981). William
Morain, a surgeon with a Mormon background, describes how the terror of
such painful surgical assaults creates dissociative injuries within a
child's developing brain that become "an integral part of the psyche
that can permeate all corners of \[his\] mind forever" (Morain, 2013).
However, severe childhood trauma does not explain his ability to
facilitate en masse visionary experience; and does not explain the
anticholinergic symptoms associated with his own early visions and many
early convert visions reported to have occurred between 1830 and 1831 as
discussed below.

JOSEPH SMITH JR.'S VISIONS

Joseph Smith Jr. had visionary experiences in his spiritual quests that
display several specific features. Analysis of these accounts and the
features of his experiences provide data to support the hypothesis he
deliberately employed entheogenic substances.

**1820: The first vision**

At 14 (Smith, 1838) or 15 years of age (Smith, 1832), Joseph Smith Jr.
embarked on a spiritual quest. Like the alchemical "philosophers" before
him, one object of his quest was "wisdom" (Smith, 1838, 1843). Joseph
Smith's later revelation "the Word of Wisdom" reflects the view that
taking the proper things into one's body -- avoiding addictants and
using "every herb in the season thereof" would enable the seeker to
"find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures"
(D&C 89). Before he went into the grove in 1820 or 1821 to obtain
wisdom, already three powerful precedents directed Joseph to seek wisdom
through what he ate. First, he had a prototype for his quest in the
story of Adam and Eve, who acquired wisdom by what they ate (Genesis
3:6, 22, "KJV"). Next, the search for wisdom had also been modeled for
him by the Christian alchemists and Freemasons, who sought wisdom
through the philosopher's stone, the Bible's "white stone," and by
partaking of the elixir, the "hidden manna" of the Book of Revelation,
which also promised that "to him that overcometh" the gift to "eat of
the tree of life" (Revelation 2:7, 17, "KJV"). Also, finally, the quest
for wisdom was more immediately modeled for the young Joseph by the
elder Joseph, his father, who had been instructed through prophetic
dreams how he could gain wisdom. Here again, the model was that one
could acquire wisdom by what one ate. Joseph Smith's spiritual quest is
a continuation of his father's -- a quest for Christ's "primitive
church" for temporal and spiritual salvation, and wisdom. Joseph Jr.
reported that a quest for "wisdom" was his motivation for going to a
grove of trees where, at the age of 15, he experienced his first vision
(Smith, 1839--1841, pp. 2--3). In what Lucy Mack Smith similarly called
Joseph Smith Sr.'s "first vision," Joseph Sr. began a quest for wisdom
and forgiveness of sins by journeying into a fallen wood. He was told,
"eat," of certain edible materials found on a fallen tree, and informed,
"\[this\] will make you wise, and give unto you wisdom and
understanding" (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 57). It would be remarkable if
the younger Joseph's quest for "wisdom" were not informed by the visions
of his father. Joseph Jr. should, therefore, have expected that to
obtain wisdom, he also would need to "eat" something provided by God.
However, where would he acquire the necessary entheogenic foods? Here
again, his father's vision showed the way. Joseph Jr. sought his
visionary experience in the clearing in "early spring" (Smith,
1839--1841, p. 3), the precise time when plants would be sprouting and
entheogenic mushrooms could begin to be harvested amid the dead timber.
Joseph, a firm believer in providence, saw divine purposes in nature's
provision of various herbs and perceived God's "hand in all things," the
minute details of life (D&C 59:21; 8,9:10--11; Bradley, 2019, pp.
186--188). After seeking a physical landscape for his own "first vision"
quest for wisdom that actualized the dreamscape of his father's "first
vision" wisdom quest, what did Joseph intend to do when he arrived if
not to follow the commandment given to his father in his vision, to
obtain wisdom? Against the backdrop of the biblical Adam and Eve story,
the Masonic-biblical promises of "hidden manna," and the visionary
commandment to his father to acquire wisdom by eating what God placed on
the dead timber, Joseph Jr. was primed to perceive entheogenic plants
and mushrooms at the culminating moment of his search for wisdom as a
providence auguring that he needed to eat to obtain wisdom and of what
he needed to eat to become wise. Another potential clue to what Joseph
Jr. needed to eat to gain wisdom was the biblical description of it as
the "hidden manna." The original biblical manna, appearing in the story
of Moses's Exodus, was described in Joseph's King James Bible ("KJV") as
round edible objects found on the ground in the morning (Exodus
16:13--15). If Smith expected the "hidden manna" to take a similar form,
he would have found obvious candidates all around him in the spot where
he sought wisdom, growing on and hidden under the fallen trees of his
father's clearing. Early in the spring morning, Joseph Jr. knelt under a
canopy of oaks, birch, and hemlock, to petition God's forgiveness of his
sins. The accounts of the ensuing vision compiled by Mormon writer Eldon
Watson (1983, see also Harper, 2002, 2016) reveal the problematic
mentation and peripheral symptoms secondary to the onset of what
Burkhart (2004) identifies as anticholinergic hallucinogen intoxication.
At the onset of his theophany, Joseph (cited in Watson, 1983) reported
he: -- Saw all kinds of improper pictures; -- \[Was\] seized upon by
some power which entirely overcame \[him\]; -- \[Was blinded as\] thick
darkness gathered around \[him\]; -- His tongue ::: cleaved to \[the\]
roof \[of his mouth\] so that \[he\] could not speak; -- He heard a
noise behind \[him\] like someone walking towards \[him\]; -- He sprang
upon \[his\] feet and looked round but saw no person. -- \[Was\] ready
to sink into despair and abandon \[himself\] to destruction, not to an
imaginary ruin but to the power of some actual being from the unseen
world \[with such\] marvelous power as I had never ::: felt in any being
(see also Harper, 2012).

**Anticholinergic toxidrome**

Had Joseph been taken to a local physician of the period during the
initial phase of intoxication, the diagnosis of poisoning with a member
of the Solanaceae family, such as Black Henbane (H. niger) or D.
stramonium would have easily been made ("Communications", 1811; Copland,
Darwall, & Conolly, 1826, pp. 422--423; Jonasson & Afshari, 2016;
Thornton, 1811, pp. 55--61; W, 1833). Similar clinical features can also
present with poisoning by the A. muscaria mushroom (Burkhart, 2004, p.
691; Cahill, 2003; RolstonCregler, 2017). Ibotenic acid (pantherine and
agarine) and muscimol are among the active components of A. muscaria,
substances that with powerful effects on the central nervous system.
Although tropanic alkaloids are not present, the signs and symptoms of
poisoning with the fly agaric are called "mycoatropinic," and they
resemble those produced by D. stramonium, A. belladonna, and H. niger
(Satora, Pach, Butryn, Hydzik, & Balicka- lusarczyk, 2005). The symptoms
Smith experienced related to those of the anticholinergic or
mycoatropinic toxidrome were: hypertension and hyperthermia, agitated
hallucinations, delirium and strange mental states, slurred speech,
tremors, coma, and occasionally seizures, tachycardia and dysrhythmias,
dry and flushed skin -- especially the face-dilated pupils, mydriasis,
and blurred vision, and dry mouth. These symptoms constitute one of five
basic toxidromes (Omar, & Foxworth, 2014). Features of the
anticholinergic toxidrome in Joseph's accounts of his first vision
include being rendered "blind as a bat" (mydriasis, blurred vision),
"mad as a hatter" (altered mental status, delusional paranoia, and
hallucinations), and "dry as a bone" (dry mucous membranes), and a
duration of intoxication lasting several hours or more. Paralysis
associated with D. stramonium is also reported (Anon., 1811). Young
Joseph either understood the sublethal, visionary dose or was lucky,
since coma and death may ensue in severe poisonings of D. stramonium (Le
Garff, Delannoy, Mesli, Hédouin, & Tournel, 2016) and A. muscaria
(MikaszewskaSokolewiczi, et al., 2016). From Eldon Watson's (1983)
textural harmony of Joseph Smith's first vision, we learn that just as
Joseph was anticipating ego dissolution and imminent death, a "light
appeared to ::: gradually descending towards him" until he was
"surrounded by a brilliant light" creating "a peculiar sensation
throughout his whole system" and causing "his mind" to be "caught away
from the natural objects with which he was surrounded; and he was
enwrapped in a heavenly vision." In the vision, Joseph's profound sense
of guilt was assuaged as an angel appeared (the Lord) and assured him
that his sins were forgiven. Then, "when I came to myself again," Joseph
explained, "I found myself lying on \[my\] back looking up into Heaven
::: without any strength ::: \[but with a\] mind in a state of calmness
and peace, indescribable." Joseph added, "my Soul was filled with love
and for many days. I could rejoice with great Joy, and the Lord was with
me." Table 1 compares the relationship between Smith's symptomatology
and those of the anticholinergic syndrome. Joseph Jr.'s description of
his first vision is profoundly personal and unlikely to have been
manufactured due to embarrassing symptoms diagnostic of anticholinergic
intoxication he later attempted to hide or contextualize. Further
confirming that Joseph was in a visibly physically altered condition
after his initial recovery from the visionary state, he reports that
upon his reentry into his family home, his mother asked him, "What is
the matter?" (Smith, L. M., 1853, p. 133). Similar symptoms also
appeared during Mormon convert visionary experience when Joseph Smith
founded his Church in 1830 (referenced below). The positive symptoms
associated with Joseph's vision also suggest the known antidepressant
effects of scopolamine (from D. stramonium or Black Henbane) or possibly
muscimol from Amanita muscaria. Scopolamine "produces rapid and
significant symptom improvement in patients with depression" (Witkin et
al., 2014), similar to the afterglow phenomenon of classic entheogens
(Maji´c, Schmidt, & Gallinat, 2015). A feature of Smith's "first vision"
experience that cries out for explanation is its stark tangibility and
experienced veridicality. He emerged from his experience of the demonic
and the divine convinced of the actuality of the beings he had
encountered: "But exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me
out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very
moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to
destruction, not to an imaginary ruin but to the power of some actual
being from the unseen world who had such a marvelous power as I had
never before felt in any being ::: I had actually seen a light and in
the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did, in reality,
speak unto me" (Smith, 1839--1841, p. 4). Smith either found himself
bound by an "actual being" and then "actually saw" a light, or there
were neurophysiological changes in his brain and body that facilitated
their perception. Even if Smith is understood to have encountered
external spiritual forces, one would have to explain what physiological
changes facilitated his ability to physically engage with entities that
cannot usually be seen or felt. Entheogenic D. stramonium explains how
Joseph Smith perceived his engagement with spiritual forces as an actual
physical encounter. A high dose of psilocybin would have provided the
mind-opening, cosmological, transformative, and
disintegrating/reintegrating aspects of the experience, while D.
stramonium would have given the experience of another reality, initially
in the grips of a terrifyingly, physically real evil being. Unbeknownst
to Joseph Smith, as for the mythical Adam and Eve, eating the "forbidden
fruit" entailed an experience of evil in tangible form (Satan/the
serpent) to obtain wisdom -- that is to experience the "deepest abyss"
besides "commune with God" (Smith, 1977, p. 137). Smith also acted the
part of an alchemist transmuting or "transfiguring" his physical state
to enable himself to find wisdom through the visionary experience of
both good and evil, Satan and God. It is also possible that Joseph Smith
used P. ovoideocystidiata or another species of psilocybin-containing
mushroom, although this is less likely than an anticholinergic entheogen
based solely on the symptomology. We mention the possibility of P.
ovoideocystidiata use here because this mushroom can be found from Rhode
Island to Kentucky and is especially prevalent in the Ohio River Valley
(Allen, Gartz, Molter, & Sihanonth, 2009; Guzmán et al., 2007), where it
grows on wood debris, especially along rivers, streams, and wet valley
areas such as the Sacred Grove. The Sacred Grove hosts a great variety
of fungi, besides A. muscaria due to it residing in a small valley of
seasonally wet and cooler terrain. On two visits to the Sacred Grove
before the conception of an entheogenic origin of Mormonism, one author
(RB) found abundant mushrooms of several varieties, including one in
Figure 28. The photographed mushroom in the sacred grove appears
suspiciously like a Psilocybe species mushroom in Figure 29;
unfortunately, no field-testing for the typical blue reaction to
pressure was conducted.

We talk a lot about the Kirtland Temple Dedication ceremony as being the
entheogenic crux of Smith's ministry but we can't ignore the signals
present in his self-reported visionary experiences. For anybody who's
had an ego-dissolution level of entheogenic experience, they can
certainly empathize with what Smith reported as happening during his
vision experience. Many will argue about what he actually saw during the
vision as the reported spirit conjurations vary from account to account.
It initially appears as an angel, then legion of angels, then the face
of God, then god the father and Jesus Christ in corporeal form. These
details are incidental when viewed in the larger context of
hallucinatory experiences as the physiological symptoms are relatively
consistent throughout and most detailed in the latest account. Smith
claimed he was physically pinned by a being, his tongue was stuck to the
roof of his mouth, his vision was blurred, a pillar of white, he woke up
lying on his back and enfeebled by the experience. All of these are very
common symptoms of witching ointment intoxication. Every detail in his
accounts can be explained by him eating Datura seeds or some red-capped
mushrooms which grow prolifically in that area of New England. Did the
first vision happen in 1820? 1821? 1823? Did he see angels, god, or god
and Jesus? These questions only matter within the belief system and
historical narrative of the correlated church's claim. Frankly, when
viewing these claims and historical discrepancies through an entheogenic
lens, none of those questions really matter because the two points of
consistency throughout the various accounts are the time of year, the
autumnal equinox, and the self-reported symptoms which perfectly match
anticholinergic symptomology. What's more, entheogen use can help to
explain the discrepancies in the self-reported vision. Entheogenic
hallucinations are inherently squishy and hard to remember, but leave a
truly remarkable impact on the mind of the user. The term ineffability
is best to describe what is perceived when proper dose, set, and setting
variable are adhered to because the experiences defy description. Smith
clearly had a life-changing experience, what we might call theophany, in
that grove, but when he tried to describe it to eager questioners years
after the fact, details of the vision become blurry and timelines become
vague, while the gravity of the experience still retains its weight. Ask
anybody to describe their trip immediately after it happens and they
won't have the words. Ask them a year after, they might have figured
something out but words will still escape them. Ask them 20 years down
the road and they'll remember how profound the experience was, but still
will struggle to find words. Few people have been able to apply words to
these incredible experiences. I would recommend to you listeners to
watch a lecture or media appearance by Terrence McKenna. He uses
incredibly loaded spiritual language to describe the experiences and his
voice has the ability to lull the viewer into a trance, but few others
have I ever seen or read such profound and accurate descriptions of
these experiences which transcend religious creeds and simplistic
biblical terminology that confined Joseph when relating his experiences
to different people and different times in his life.

**Entheogenic replication of Smith's first vision**

Many examples of entheogenic experiences are reported in peer-reviewed
literature and on the internet that bear a striking similarity to those
of Joseph Smith. For example, religious historian Huston Smith
initiation into "ultimate reality" was occasioned by a
psilocybin-containing mushroom. Huston reports:

> *What the day accomplished, ::: was to enable me for the first time to
> experience the respective levels of the Chain \[of Being\], all the
> way to its top. The dominant effects of the experience were two: awe
> (which I had known conceptually as the distinctive religious emotion
> but had never before experienced so intensely) and certainty. There
> was no doubting that the Reality I experienced was ultimate. That
> conviction has remained. (2001, p. 126)*

In the same year (1961), Huston ingested peyote cactus and reported: "I
noted mounting tension in my body that turned into tremors in my legs
::: I \[began\] experiencing ::: the clear, unbroken Light. I was now
seeing ::: with the force of the sun, in comparison with which everyday
experience reveals only flickering shadows in a dim cavern ::: \[I saw\]
worlds within worlds" (2000, p. 11). Smith concluded that using
entheogenic substances can occasion an experience with a form
indistinguishable from those of the experiences of religious mystics.
Heinrich (2002, pp. 201--203) ingested A. muscaria as the entheogenic
facilitator and reported:\
-- I felt like I weighed thousands of pounds and could no longer sit
up.\
-- \[In\] a great darkness and a great silence, the heavens opened above
my head.\
-- The bliss I had experienced prior to this new revelation now paled to
insignificance in an immensity of light that was also the purest love.\
-- The absolute profundity of the experience cannot be denied, neither
can be adequately expressed, though one is moved to try.

Huston's and Heinrich's entheogenic reports reveal the core features of
Smith's earlier vision: an experience of physical heaviness, visual
darkness, an awe-inspiring light from above, a voice out of heaven,
experience with the unfathomable Godhead and feelings of unspeakable
joy.

**Joseph Smith's actual first vision**

His "actual first vision" and a vision of a divining instrument, a "seer
stone," initiated Joseph Smith's career as a visionary scryer. Mormon
historians connected this seer stone vision, in which Smith saw "a small
stone :::\[which\] became luminous, and dazzled his eyes, and after a
short time it became as intense as the mid-day sun," with his theophanic
"first vision," linking the visions conceptually and placing them in
roughly the same time frame (Bradley, 2010; Purple, 1877). Smith's
understanding of his white seer stone as the white stone of Revelation
2:17 also connects it with the white stone of Hiram Abiff and,
therefore, the "hidden manna" mentioned in the Masonic degrees and
thought to have been administered in the more esoteric versions of those
degrees. It was from underneath of the acacia sprig, believed to be an
entheogenic symbol in masonic lore, that Hiram Abiff's remains and
"jewel" were reportedly excavated (Bernard, 1829). Conflating "jewel"
and "white stone," Smith may have conceived of Hiram Abiff's body and
"white stone" being recovered together from under the tree. The acacia
marking the burial site of Hiram Abiff's body and "jewel" is understood
in freemasonry as a "tree of life" (referenced below). Joseph Smith
reported excavating under a tree to find his white stone, recalling the
excavation of Hiram's white stone under the acacia tree. After
recovering this stone, Joseph Smith placed it in the darkness of his
hat, looked into it, and discovered that he had acquired "one of the
attributes of Deity, an All-Seeing Eye" (Bradley, 2010; Purple, 1877)
reflecting another probable occasion on which he ate from an entheogenic
plant. Joseph Smith, eating from such "tree of life" anticipated The
Book of Mormon's descriptions of an entheogenic "tree of life,"
discussed below.

**1823 Indian visions**

Joseph Smith's next vision in 1823 is notable for the post-vision
weakness and its ancestral Amerindian content. The many ancestral
Amerindian tumuli found and excavated in New York and Ohio undoubtedly
fascinated the young Joseph, as did the widely held belief that
Amerindians were the remnants of Lost Tribes of Israel. However, as he
had 3 years previously, Joseph's vision was preceded by fervently asking
forgiveness of his sins. When the vision opened, a brilliant light
appeared; and in the light, Joseph claimed that he saw an angel,
identified as an ancestral Amerindian, with whom he spent the entire
night. "I discovered a light appearing ::: until the room was lighter
than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside,
standing in the air::: his whole person was glorious beyond description,
and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light
::: When I first looked upon him, I was afraid. \[And he\] said there
was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the
former inhabitants of this continent" (Smith, 1830, front piece).
Following these visions, Joseph arose to work on the family farm but on
meeting his father in the field, "found \[his\] strength so exhausted as
to render \[him\] entirely unable" to labor.

PSYCHEDELICS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

Several lines of evidence in The Book of Mormon suggest Joseph Smith's
awareness of psychedelics and their effects. The Book of Mormon
functioned as sacred scripture and acted as a psychopomp for early
Mormon converts seeking direct and personal experience with God under
the influence of entheogenic material. Consistent with this view, Mormon
Jungian psychiatrist Groesbeck (2004) argues for The Book of Mormon as
"symbolic history." We suggest that passages in The Book of Mormon and
other early Mormon sacred writings guide spiritual experiences as
outlined by Leary, Metzner, and Alpert (1964) in discussing the Tibetan
Book of the Dead -- to establish a setting for predisposing early Mormon
converts to direct and personal experience with God through spiritual
ecstasies. Another aspect of the set and setting of early Mormon
visionary experience is Joseph Smith himself -- as the archetypal
shaman. Leary et al. (1964) emphasize the need for "a trusted person :::
to remind and refresh the memory of the voyager during the experience."
Smith was that trusted person. Herbs, although not frequently mentioned
in The Book of Mormon, are highly endorsed as medicines explicitly and
entheogenic substances implicitly. For instance, The Book of Mormon
speaks of the "excellent qualities of the many plants and roots which
God had prepared to remove the cause of diseases" (Smith, 1830, p. 353).
We argue here that Smith, in The Book of Mormon, intended to reference
not only the treatment of bodily diseases but also maladies of the soul.
While traditional herbs may be useful for treating ailments relating to
the body, it is the entheogenic herbs that lift the mood and relieve
despair, as demonstrated after partaking of unusual fruit described in
Joseph Sr.'s entheogenic dream discussed above and in The Book of Mormon
tree of life allegory discussed below. Also, in The Book of Mormon,
Smith associates the use of herbs with symptomatology such as\
-- death-like experience lasting days rather than hours,\
-- symptoms resulting in sensations of tongue swelling,\
-- sensations of motions,\
-- taste of light,\
-- enlightenment, and\
-- mood elevation.

These symptoms, in our view, demonstrate that Smith encoded his
entheogenic knowledge ~~encoded~~ in The Book of Mormon.

**Death and rebirth symbology (ego death)**

Mormon historian Don Bradley (2019) interprets that Joseph Smith's first
vision is an initiation or endowment transforming an unaccomplished
young man from an improvised family into religious royalty as a seer and
prophet. We argued here that Smith's first vision, facilitated by an
entheogen, corresponds to similar royal entheogen-infused death and
rebirth initiation rituals. Knight and Lomas (1996) explain:

> *The new king would have undergone 'death' by means of a potion
> administered to him by the high priest in the gathering of the inner
> group of the holders of the royal secrets. This drug would have been a
> hallucinogenic that slowly induced a catatonic state, leaving the new
> king, as inert as a corpse. (p. 145)*

An entheogenic initiation of this nature would change the thoughts and
feelings previously held by the new king. Two Book of Mormon narratives
reflect entheogen-infused royal initiation rites discussed by Knight and
Lomas. In the first narrative, after being chastised for
unrighteousness,

> *\[The King\] fell unto the earth, as if he were dead ::: for the
> space of two days ::: under the power of God ::: and the light which
> did light up his mind ::: had infused such joy into his soul (276-7)
> \[and similarly, the Queen then arose and\] ::: cried ::: O blessed
> Jesus::: \[clasping\] her hands, being filled with joy. (pp.
> 278--279)*

In the second narrative, the son of a Prophet King unprepared to succeed
him on the throne is reprimanded by his father. In this account, the son
reported:

> *I fell to the earth; and it was for the space of three days and three
> nights, that I could not open my mouth; neither had I the use of my
> limbs::: I \[thought\] that I could ::: become extinct both soul and
> body ::: \[after three days and three nights\] I cried within my
> heart, 0 Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, ::: and when I
> thought this, ::: I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.
> And 0, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul
> was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain. (pp. 324--325)*

These remarkable narratives in The Book of Mormon parallel the
first-vision accounts given by Joseph Smith supporting the thesis that
his first vision was an entheogen-infused initiation. In his first
vision,\
1. Smith felt profound guilt and shame associated with his sin (Smith,
J., 1832, p. 6),\
2. He was in mortal fear of "sudden destruction" (Smith, J., 1839--1841,
p. 3),\
3. When Smith came to himself, he "was sprawling on \[his\] back and it
was some time before \[his\] strength returned" (Smith, J., 1842, p.
748).\
4. Afterward, he had feelings of "calmness and peace, indescribable"
(Pratt, 1840, p. 7).

We suggest that more than coincidence, Joseph Smith's first vision, The
Book of Mormon death and rebirth accounts parallel Knight and Lomas'
entheogen-infused royal initiation rite. It seems reasonable to conclude
that Smith's experience and The Book of Mormon accounts were related to
esotericism and entheogens.

**Synesthesia**

One feature of visionary experiences reported in The Book of Mormon,
synesthesia (the stimulation of one sense modality provoking sensation
in another) strongly suggests the effect of an ingested entheogen. In
The Book of Mormon, Joseph informs the convert that after ingesting the
seed of the fruit of the tree, they should expect it to feel "swelling"
within the chest closely followed by "swelling motions." After the onset
of the swelling motions, Smith informed converts to expect the
appearance of light that "enlightens the understanding" so the "mind
doth begin to expand," i.e., experiences the desired psychedelic
properties of the seed. This mind expansion is accompanied, according to
Smith, by the taste of light suggesting the phenomena of psychedelic
associated synesthesia: "when you feel these swelling motions ::: it
beginneth to be delicious ::: ye have tasted this light" (Smith, 1830,
pp. 315--316). Two examples will be most relevant here: Lehi's dream of
the tree of life and Alma's parable of a seed that grows into a tree of
life. Joseph Jr. inserts into The Book of Mormon a vision of an Edenic
tree its fruit, and upon ingesting it, the profound experience of the
love of God -- nearly identical to his father's Edenic vision in 1811
(Smith, 1830, pp. 18--21). Another probable reference to synesthetic
bodily symptoms in the text of The Book of Mormon appears in a parable
by the prophet Alma comparing God's word to a seed. The parable
describes the cultivation of a plant from seed, ultimately to a
full-grown tree revealed to be, like Lehi's, "a tree of life" bearing
fruit.

> *Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place,
> that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true
> seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that
> ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell
> within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will
> begin to say within yourselves---It must needs be that this is a good
> seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul;
> yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to
> be delicious to me. (Smith, 1830, p. 315)*

The effects of cultivating this seed expand the mind, enlarge the soul,
stimulate the taste of light, and produce inexpressible joy and
happiness. In these passages, Joseph Smith encapsulated the very meaning
of the current meanings of "psychedelic" and "entheogen." More
importantly, at least as far as Joseph Smith is concerned, the reader of
The Book of Mormon is invited in this passage to experience the same
psychedelic or entheogenic enlightenment, synesthesia, and
transformation as he had.

**Mood elevation**

Descriptions of the visionary dreams of Joseph Smith's father, and his
first vision, his Indian visions, and early Mormon visions in Kirtland
Ohio (discussed below) manifest mood-elevating properties. The
mood-elevating effects of entheogens are well established: eventually,
they will be one modality of managing treatment-resistant depression
(see articles in Winkelman & Sessa, 2019). The antidepressant effects of
psychedelic experience suggest motivational salience for entheogen use
throughout history and specifically in the Smith family to facilitate
visionary experience and as antidepressants. La Barre (1947) observed
that Native American peyote use in religious confessionals provided a
primitive form of psychotherapy. Similarly, the mood-elevating sequelae
of Joseph Smith's use of entheogens in early Mormon rituals and
confessionals was practical psychotherapy for early Mormons; and likely
unconscious salience for conversion to Mormonism and convert resilience
during the hardships of Mormon diasporas.

That's where we'll leave off this section of reading through our paper
from the Journal of Psychedelic Studies titled The Entheogenic Origins
of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis. I know these episodes have been
relatively long when compared to our historical timeline episodes, but
the topic is obviously quite dense and requires this much detail to
begin to introduce such massive concepts. In many ways, this paper
attempts to bring to fields of academia together where they've scarcely
been conjoined before. The field of Mormon history is a rich and
exciting field of academia, as is psychedelics research, but the two
fields rarely have any shared ground upon which to cooperate. We feel
the primary purpose of this paper is to introduce an interdisciplinary
approach to Mormon history. Psychedelics researchers rarely study Mormon
history and the same is true of the inverse, which we feel is a
disservice when the founding documents of Mormonism can help explain
entheogenic origins to many world religions with less available
documents and the field of psychedelics can help explain previously
inexplicable aspects of early Mormon history. There is shared ground
where these fields can coexist, it just takes a sizeable treatise to do
it. Therefore, I apologize if this isn't what you come to this show for
and you're bored with the topic or it just isn't up your alley of
interest. For those of you still here, there's still much more to
discuss and the third episode of reading this paper will be the longest
yet as the show script is already 4 pages longer than these previous two
episodes. However, part 3 will dive into the nitty gritty of
Kirtland-era visionary Mormonism, the evolution in Nauvoo, and the
legacy left behind by this entheogenic religion before finally drawing a
short conclusion calling on more historians and scholars to seriously
consider this aspect of Mormon history and conduct their own research to
add to the overall Smith-entheogen theory which is largely in its infant
stages right now. I'll also say thank you to those of you who are
listening all the way through these episodes. My being able to put these
out on the Naked Mormonism feed has allowed not only time to travel to
visit family during the holidays, but opened up time to do other
research into Mormon Money in light of the recent revelations concerning
Ensign Peak Advisors and the church stockpiling \$100b. So, if you want
Mormon history but aren't as interested in psychedelics, I'd encourage
you to check the latest episodes of the Glass Box Podcast to scratch
that itch and understand the recent media outrage in a deeper context.
Thank you for listening.
