---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 197 - Fostered Dissent'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-197-fostered-dissent/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-197-fostered-dissent
category: History
date: 2020-03-06 04:00:00 +0000
---

Ep 197 -- Fostered Dissent

On this episode, we talk about the Fosters, Robert D. and Charles A. Who
are they? Why are they important? What did they do? Charles Foster,
unfortunately, is a rather obscure historical figure. His brother
Robert, however, figures prominently in the Mormon kingdom of Nauvoo
from its inception. We talk about the growing divide between Joseph
Smith and Robert D. Foster as the Nauvoo church expanded and grew until
Charles Foster pulls a pistol on the prophet in broad daylight. What
does it all mean?

Help us start our Mormon-themed D&D campaign by supporting the show!
<https://www.patreon.com/nakedmormonism>

Robert D. Foster\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/robert-d-foster>

Charles A. Foster\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/charles-ambrose-foster>

Robert Foster Duty assignment\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/assignment-from-robert-d-foster-1-july-1842/1>

Nauvoo Legion roles\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/back/nauvoo-legion-officers-1841-1844?p=1&highlight=nauvoo%20legion%20may%201844%20foster>

Nauvoo v. Davis for slander\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#full-transcript>

JS Discourse 21 February 1843\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/discourse-21-february-1843-as-reported-by-willard-richards/2#full-transcript>

Memorial to Congress signed by Charles and Robert Foster\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/memorial-to-the-united-states-senate-and-house-of-representatives-28-november-1843/13>

Illinois v. Colton\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/complaint-10-april-1844-state-of-illinois-v-colton/1#facts>

Council of Fifty Minutes\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/236#full-transcript>

JS 1844 Nauvoo Journal\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#full-transcript>

One Man's Nauvoo by James B. Allen\
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/23286015?seq=13#metadata_info_tab_contents>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Merch Store <https://groundgnomes.launchcart.store/shop>\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Last week we brought up some important folks in Nauvoo Mormon history,
the Fosters, Higbees, and Laws. We're going to spend the next 3 episodes
talking about each of these families individually, what happened to
them, why they're important, and what their association with Nauvoo
Mormonism ultimately resulted in. Today we're talking about the Fosters.

Last week, Charles Foster pointed a pistol at the chest of Joseph Smith
in broad daylight. If not for Porter Rockwell there to disarm Foster, Jo
could have been assassinated at that very moment, but the time wasn't
quite right. Charles Ambrose Foster isn't an especially prominent figure
in Mormon history; Robert D. Bob-the-builder Foster, Charles' brother,
typically garners the majority of the ink. But let's talk about these
brothers now that they're arrested and in the Nauvoo jail awaiting
trial; let's get a little biographical sketch. Listeners familiar enough
with Nauvoo Mormon history will know why we're focusing on the Fosters,
Higbees, and Laws in May of 1844 where our timeline currently rests. If
that's you, let's keep it between you and me for a couple more episodes
so we don't spoil the surprise for the uninitiated.

Charles A. Foster and Robert D. Foster immigrated to America from
Northamptonshire, England with their parents in 1831. Robert was the
older brother to Charles; they were both sons of John Foster and Jane
Knibb. The Foster family arrived in New York in late spring of 1831,
with Charles at age 15 and Robert aged 20. Two strapping young lads
getting a new start in a teenage America with seemingly endless
opportunities. Unfortunately, as is the case with most minor actors in
early Mormonism, not much about the Foster brothers before Mormonism is
known and possibly doesn't exist except for maybe a hiding land deed in
some state archive filing cabinet. Aside from any undiscovered
documents, all we really know about the Foster brothers is that they
moved to Hancock County sometime before 1839, at least Robert D.
Bob-the-builder Foster had; Charles Foster, it's unclear when he arrived
in Hancock County.

This is notable because the Fosters were brothers who were trying to
make a life for themselves around Commerce, Illinois when the Mormon
refugees began arriving in early 1839 from their makeshift settlement in
Quincy, which is the county seat of adjacent Adams county. By 1839,
Robert D. Foster had been married to Sarah Phinney for 2 years. They
were both baptized into the church sometime before October 1839 because
in October is when Robert was ordained an elder.

Here, Charles Foster, still unmarried according to available documents,
shrinks a bit into historical obscurity until 1843. However, Robert D.
Foster immediately becomes elevated to the inner-circle of Jo's elites.
Robert was tasked with the most-important task of being Jo's personal
scribe for a specific journey.

Once Jo had escaped from Liberty Jail in spring of 1839, he and other
church leaders collected hundreds of affidavits signed by thousands of
individuals about what they'd just experienced during the
Missouri-Mormon war and the 5 years preceding it. That information was
compiled into a folder and five men set out on a mission to present that
information to President Martin Van Buren and Congress, petitioning the
government for redress to the tune of \$1.2mn. Those five men who
departed on this journey of nearly 1000 miles were Hingepin Sidney
Rigdon, in his sickly state he'd yet to recover from after Liberty Jail,
Pistol Packin' Porter Rockwell, as Jo's personal bodyguard during the
journey, Jo himself, and Robert D. Bob-the-builder Foster as scribe and
historian. Elias Higbee was also present, but we'll talk about him next
week.

Apparently, Robert Foster did keep Jo's journal during the trip to and
from Washington D.C. The trip all ended in nothing good for the Mormons
coming from it, beyond gaining the sympathy of many powerful men in
government, which would pay off just not immediately the way a
government payout of a million dollars would have. What happened to that
journal? That's a matter of historical mystery. Foster had maintained
with the posse for the majority of the journey, but Rigdon became to ill
to continue traveling.

HoC 4:21

> About this time we had arrived near Columbus, when the roads were so
> bad, Elder Rigdon's health so poor, and the time so fast spending,
> when it was necessary for the committee to be in Washington, that I
> started in the stage with Judge Higbee on the most expeditious route
> to Washington City, leaving Rockwell, Rigdon, and Foster, to come on
> at their leisure in the carriage.

Bob-the-builder Foster wasn't just a carpenter, he was also yet one more
herbal physician Jo brought into his inner circle. He's frequently
referred to as Dr. Foster throughout Nauvoo documents, leading one to
believe he probably split his time evenly between herbal physician and
his duties with building, and other government-related duties. Foster
stayed with Pistol Packin' Port and Rigdon in Columbus, Ohio to help
Rigdon get recovered enough to continue the journey. Jo and Elias Higbee
continued their journey to D.C. to keep with the appointment they had
scheduled for their hearing before Congress.

Notably, during the journey, they ran into Wilson and William Law on
their way to the Mormon refugee settlement from Canada. The Laws hadn't
been present in Missouri during the war; they'd converted in Canada and
waited until the Mormons were settling in Quincy and Commerce before
immigrating themselves. The Laws were in "company with seven wagons from
Canada, who returned with us to Springfield, and tarried while we did
until the 8^th^."

These threads which form a tapestry of dissent by 1844 were only
beginning to be strung together in late 1839 here. Back to the story!
Robert Foster kept the journal, but what happened to it is unknown. Jo
had one of his scribes write this in his journal upon his return, after
loosely recounting the journey from memory.

HoC 4:72

I depended on Dr. Foster to keep my daily journal during this journey,
but he has failed me.

Apparently, Jo asked Robert D. Foster for the journal repeatedly but
Foster never gave it up. There could be a few reasons for this. Maybe he
was embarrassed with how little he'd actually recorded and wanted to
buff it up before giving it to Jo but didn't have the time. Maybe he
told Jo he was recording everything but actually spent his time keeping
Hingepin Rigdon alive and thus never actually wrote anything down. Maybe
it was lost during the journey. Or, if we want to take a bit more of a
speculative approach with historical hindsight, maybe Robert Foster saw
some of Jo's tendencies during those many hours on the road every day
and recorded what he saw to be used as leverage at a later time. Maybe,
what Jo had preached during his return trip could be viewed as
treasonous or threatening against the President of the United States and
Foster didn't want his name attached to anything so dangerous.

Unfortunately, because the record simply doesn't tell us more, we can't
ever know what happened to that book at the time and we surely can't
know if it survived, but it's quite doubtful. It is notable, however,
that Robert D. Foster became increasingly referred to as Dr. Foster from
that time forward. In accordance with his being of age to join the
Nauvoo Legion and his medical expertise, Dr. Foster was appointed
surgeon general in the Nauvoo Legion once the Nauvoo Charter passed the
Illinois state legislature and the Legion was formed.

The next place Robert D. Foster enters Nauvoo documentation is in one of
the most consequential pieces of paper to all of Nauvoo history, which
became D&C 124.

John C. Wreck-it Bennett was a crucial addition to the church in
September of 1840. He held an incredible amount of sway in powerful
circles and had recently been appointed as brigadier general in the
Illinois State militia.

When he joined the church and the Mormon settlement, they were in a bad
place; yet opportunities flourished and so did Bennett. Bennett was
almost single-handedly responsible for the passing of the Nauvoo Charter
through the Illinois state legislature with the help of both Stephen A.
Douglas and Abraham Lincoln 20 years before those two men were household
names. The Nauvoo Charter established the legal framework from which
Nauvoo would be constructed and it granted the Mormon leadership all
sorts of incredible rights including taxation, the Nauvoo Legion, the
Municipal Court, and plenty of other necessary items when building a
theocracy.

The Charter, however, was the secular side of Nauvoo's establishment.
Concomitant with it going into effect in February 1841, Jo gave a
revelation which has become modern D&C 124, establishing the religious
side of Nauvoo and entangling many of the affairs and government bodies
formed by the Nauvoo Charter.

A lot of big names are present in the revelation, Jo's first actual
revelation since the Mormons had fled Missouri 2 years prior. Vinson
Knight, Hyrum Smith, George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider, William
Law; a bunch of Nauvoo Mormon elites are called by name in this
revelation which gave specific instructions to each of these people or
called them to specific positions.

From how verse 34 reads in the original, there's a bit to tease out
about Robert D. Foster. Notably, in the modern D&C 124, this is verses
115-118, but as it was originally divided it was a standalone sentence
all about Robert D. Foster.

> 34 And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster
> will obey my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph,
> according to the contract which he has made with him, as the door
> shall be open to him from time to time; and let him repent of all his
> folly, and clothe himself with charity, and cease to do evil, and lay
> aside all his hard speeches, and pay stock also into the hands of the
> quorum of the Nauvoo House, for himself and for his generation after
> him, from generation to generation, and hearken unto the counsel of my
> servants Joseph and Hyrum and William Law, and unto the authorities
> which I have called to lay the foundation of Zion, and it shall be
> well with him forever and ever: even so; Amen.

This is how Robert D. Foster got his nickname of Bob-the-builder Foster.
He was commanded by god, as Jo claimed, to build the Nauvoo Mansion. If
you've ever been to Nauvoo you'll be able to recall this intersection of
buildings at Main and Water streets. On Water street you have Jo's Red
Brick Store, the Nauvoo Homestead, which was the first home the Smith
family lived in upon their arrival to Commerce, then across Main street
you have the mansion home and just a little toward the Mississippi on
Main street you have the Nauvoo House and another block down Water
Street from this intersection you have the Rigdon Home and the homes of
a number of other Mormon elites. That L-shaped building, known as the
Nauvoo Mansion, became the Smith family home from late 1842 until... I
actually don't know when Emma moved out of the Mansion house. I know
ownership of it was disputed as was the case with all of Jo's other
properties, but I don't actually know how long Emma and the kids
continued to live there. If you know, hit me up and I'll read your
comment on air.

This Nauvoo Mansion became a sore-spot between Jo and Robert
Bob-the-builder Foster. Robert couldn't complete construction at a pace
consistent with Jo's wishes. Jo couldn't provide enough lumber and other
resources to the project for Robert to keep a consistent pace. Many
disagreements between the two centered around the Nauvoo Mansion and Jo
repeatedly called out Robert D. Foster from the pulpit for lacking faith
or motivation.

However, the Nauvoo Mansion eventually did finish construction. All the
while, Bob the builder was gaining sizeable wealth in the city. While
his younger brother, Charles A. Foster, has very little surviving
documentation with his name on it, Robert D. Foster was quite the land
speculator around Nauvoo. I counted no less than 25 individual deeds
with Robert D. Foster's name on them through all of 1841-4, most of
which happened in 1843 after he'd completed the Nauvoo Mansion.

With this many land deeds having his name on them, it leads me to
believe that Robert D. Foster was quite well-off. If that were the only
data point it would be a solid assumption, but there's another data
point where Robert Foster's wealth was made an example of by Joseph
Smith from the pulpit.

In February 1843, Jo was giving a discourse, which was recorded by
White-out Willard Richards. Jo was ranting about all sorts of things to
the temple committee when they were really far behind schedule and most
of the temple was covered to shelter the lumber from the harsh winter on
the Mississippi. This is one of many speeches Jo gave to the temple
committee telling them to pick up the pace on the temple and on the
Nauvoo House project.

The sermon begins with a response to Lucian Woodworth giving a speech.
Woodworth was not an official member of the church at this time, he was
either a believer in other spiritualism or was agnostic. However, Jo
referred to Woodworth as a Pagan Prophet at the beginning of the speech,
before he goes on to decry the class divisions and materialism
manifesting throughout Nauvoo, making an example of Foster for the
wealth he'd gained, possibly pointing a little jab at Foster suspecting
him of colluding with John C. Wreck-it Bennett, who'd defected publicly
from the church less than a year before and had published his expose
book just a couple months before this speech.

> Well, the Pagan Prophet has preached us a pretty good sermon this
> morning, and I don't know as I can better it much, but I feel disposed
> to break off the yoke of oppression and say what I have a mind to. If
> the Pagans and the Pagan Prophet feel more for our prosperity than we
> do for ourselves, it is curous; I am almost converted to his doctrine.
> He has prophesied that if these buildings go down, it will curse the
> place. I verily know it is true: let us build the Temple. There may be
> some speculations about the Nauvoo House, say some. Some say, because
> we live on the hill, we must build up this part on the hill. Does that
> coat fit you, Dr. Foster? ("Pretty well.") Put it on, then. This is
> the way people swell, like the ox or toad in the fable; they'll come
> down under the hill among little folks, and say, "Br. Joseph, how I
> love you; can I do anything for you\[?\]" and then go away secretly
> and get up opposition, and sing out our names to strangers and
> scoundrels with an evil influence. I wan all men to feel for me, when
> I have shook the bush and borne the burden in the heat of the day; and
> if they do not, I speak in authority, in the name of the Lord God,
> they shall be damned...
>
> When men have done what they can, or will do for the Temple, let them
> do what they can for the Nauvoo House. We never can accomplish one
> work at the expense of another. There is a great deal of murmuring in
> the church about me, but I don't care anything about it. I like to
> hear it thunder, and I like to hear the saints grumble, for the
> growling dog gets the sorest head;...

This is common Jo bloviation from the pulpit as dissent continued to
grow through the last half of 1842 into 1843. However, Robert D. Foster
did respond when he was directly called out for being relatively wealthy
as a result of Nauvoo House stock trades. While Foster wasn't commanded
directly to purchase stock in the Nauvoo House Association in D&C 124
like William Law and others were, he had purchased a significant amount
of the stock certificates. These stock certificates became money in
Nauvoo and throughout most of 1843, Bob the builder Foster was flush
with them. Here's what he said in response to Jo calling him out.

> As I closed, Dr. Robert D. Foster remarked to the assembly: "Much good
> may grow out of a very little, and much good may come out of this. If
> any man accuses me of exchanging Nauvoo stock for rags, &c., he is
> mistaken. I gave a thousand dollars to this house, (this he said upon
> his own responsibility) and fifty dollars to the Relief Society, and
> some to Fullmer to get stone to build Joseph a house, and I mean to
> build Joseph a house, and you may build this, and I will help you. I
> mean to profit by this: and I will divide the mammoth bones with you.
> I am guilty of all of which I have been charged.

That whole speech and exchange with Robert D. Foster comes from pages
277-9 of volume 5 of the Vogel edition HoC. Robert D. Foster did
continue through all of 1843 buying and selling Nauvoo House stock
certificates and land deeds. He made a considerable amount of money,
which was great as long as he was loyal to the leadership and cause of
the church. Jo liked to dote upon his loyal sycophants to inspire deeper
loyalty, but granting wealth to followers has diminishing returns and
eventually people like Robert D. Foster stop overlooking the signs that
Nauvoo was a corrupt empire.

Foster had, in multiple instances, demonstrated his loyalty to the
prophet, though. A case in March of 1842 reveals a scenario where
Foster's loyalty to the prophet squashed a dispute Jo had with somebody
to which he owed money.

Amos Davis was a convert in 1840 and had built a tavern in Nauvoo. Jo
owed him a bunch of money because Jo owed everybody money in 1842 and
was woefully in debt. Jo had planned on the government payout to fulfill
all the debts he'd incurred during the Mormon settlement in Nauvoo. When
the government told Jo and the Mormons to figure it out for themselves,
Jo was on the hook for over \$200,000 in personal debts for just land.
He was in debt unknown amounts in small bills to hundreds of other
people for everything from food to saddles and tack the Red Brick Store
had in stock. With Nauvoo House stock certificates serving essentially
as money, Jo tried to pay debts back with these certificates or by
giving people land in Nauvoo. The more he gave out plots of land, the
less value each plot of land carried and the Nauvoo economy was
incredibly volatile.

Amos Davis was furious about the debt Jo owed him as his tavern business
was struggling to stay afloat. In addition to this, Bennett, as mayor at
this time, was a teetotaler prohibitionist. He'd been able to pass
alcohol prohibitions through the Nauvoo City Council, making
tavern-keeping a tough job. Various taverns which had cropped up before
the prohibitions went into effect were visited by the city marshal,
Dimick B. Huntington, and shut down. However, some continued to operate
with Jo's approval whether because they were loyal to him, or because
they had some kind of leverage over Jo. Amos Davis was allowed to
operate his tavern because he fell into the second category.

The situation continued to build tension between Jo and Amos Davis. One
day, in early March 1842, Jo went to Davis' tavern and asked for a
drink. Davis refused to serve him until the debt Jo owed him was paid.
Jo told Davis he'd pay the man in land deeds or Nauvoo House stock
certificates. Davis was constantly suffering from the volatility of the
Nauvoo markets and wanted it paid in actual specie, silver and gold,
which were VERY precious commodities in Nauvoo. Davis continued to
refuse to serve Jo and then left the room and refused to even be in the
same room as Jo. Rumors of polygamy had gained fairly wide attention at
this time and the various brothels around town run by the Mayor, John C.
Wreck-it Bennett, and Jo's younger brother, Crazy Willey Smith, had
sullied the reputation of the city. Amos Davis called Jo a "whoremaster,
scoundrel, rascal, liar, knave, and swindler". Jo didn't like it when
people said such true things about him and he filed a complaint with the
Nauvoo Municipal court; Amos Davis was arrested by marshal Dimmick
Huntington and brought before the court the following day, chaired by
Jo's buddy, Mayor John C. Bennett.

Robert D. Foster was caught up in this scenario and arraigned in court
as a witness to the events. Here's what he testified, which you'll find
linked in the show notes as Nauvoo v. Davis from the Joseph Smith
Papers.

> [Robt D.
> Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#9481464337949724000)---
> Was
> at [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#289501857863387066)s,
> at
> Supper, [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#1522895239188130977) said
> he would be damned if he could go into the Room where Smith was, that
> Smith had broken his pledges to him, & that he considered he intended
> to Swindle him, & that he
> knew it, [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#17408551603024009475) was
> requested to tell Smith to leave the House, he delivered the Message,
> which was
> from [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#2501320946537044780)s Wife,
> & Smith
> went,--- [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#580597381534713950) then
> came into the Room,
> & [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#9037373576246418938) said
> he was willing to meet Joseph Smith in the Woods, with Words,
> Fists, or Rifles, that he believed Joseph Smith was a
> damned Whoremaster, & \<​that he was​\> a Scoundrel \<​or rascal​\>,
> does not believe Mrs. Davis asked J. Smith to Tea, but that
> Mrs Hibbard or
> Mrs. White, \<​X​\> [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#15212521702685727592) talked
> to [Davis](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#850336205905702364) to
> pacify him, & Mr Taylor was
> present, [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#9428832855487266378) did
> not speak to J. Smith, but about him,
>
> \<​X​\>
> By [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#5613100763320672848),
> did not
> recollect [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#14801739643243088055) say,
> in his
> opinion. [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#13521311010949101499) offered
> to buy the promy. Note of J. Smith,
> but [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#5849292979754132175) J.
> Smith
> told [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#17907657571083700045) he
> wd pay the
> Note [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#9830525441882992513) held,
> in Property.---
>
> By
> the [Mayor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#8991501257366356299) X [Deft](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#15728389738914580882) said
> that J. Smith was either a Swindler, or a damned Swindler,
>
> Said he did not deliver the Message to J. Smith, for that J. Smith had
> his Hat or Cap in his Hand, & in the way of going,
> when [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-10-march-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-a/1#18357683370985443486) entered
> the Room.---

Foster basically acted as the emissary between Jo and Davis once Davis
refused to even walk in the room where Jo was seated and asking for the
drink. The record almost reads as if Jo was trying to take Amos Davis'
wife as a plural wife. The Mrs. Hibbard listed there was likely Amos's
sister-in-law, and the Mrs. White was likely the wife of James White, a
guy Jo owed a lot of money for buying Commerce land during the Mormon
settlement. Whether it was Amos's wife, Amos's sister-in-law, or Mrs.
White who invited Jo to the tavern for a drink, the confrontation was
the inevitable result. Foster's testimony with Jo's buddy, John C.
Bennett chairing the hearing, led to Amos Davis being fined \$100 on
charges contained in "an Ordinance, entitled, "an ordinance concerning
Vagrants and disorderly Persons"." One of the jurors was the guy who
founded the town I grew up in, Peregrine Sessions.

Notably as well, all of the witnesses called said something about Davis
being abusive toward Jo or that Jo was a standup guy. Davis was abusive
toward Jo but I would argue that abuse was warranted or justified. Jo
was solidifying his position as a despot and his war against anybody who
spoke against him began in the Nauvoo courts. This case is one example
of how he could bend the will of the court to side with him and drive
away any dissenting voices or problematic foes like Amos Davis. Robert
D. Foster, in this early 1842 hearing, demonstrated his willingness to
follow the prophet and testify in a way that would help Jo's case and
result in the conviction of Davis.

With that said, however, Robert D. Foster, and by proxy his brother
Charles, began to be pushed to the outside of the church. While in 1842
rumors of polygamy were rampant and ubiquitous thanks to the expanding
practice of the public departure and expose of Wreck-it Bennett, by late
1843 the High Council had seen the revelation on paper. Polygamy was
expanding and more men beyond Jo, Hyrum, and Bloody Brigham were
practicing it. The more people practicing it, the more likely people are
to believe the rumors and learn that a close loved-one is caught up in
the ring.

Polygamy becoming more public yet still hush hush had some interesting
effects for everybody in Nauvoo Mormonism. If you were somebody who was
a bit more partial to Puritanical ideas of one-man one-woman marriage,
it was viewed as abhorrent. But, if you were a bit more liberal in your
views of what constitutes love and successful relationships, the idea of
polygamy presented an exciting prospect of aspiration. An example of
that division can be seen with the Fosters juxtaposed to William
Clayton, or, as we call him, Quilliam Claypen.

Foster didn't like the idea of polygamy, and began to align himself with
the leadership who knew it was being practiced but opposed it. Those
were people like William Brutus Law, William Judas Marks, Hingepin
Sidney Rigdon, and frankly the majority of other church leaders. These
were the anti-polygamists, many of whom participated in explicitly
non-polygamous sects of Mormonism after Smith's death, or altogether
quit the Mormon game from that point forward.

On the other side of that spectrum we have folks like Hyrum
Sidekick-Abiff Smith, Bloody Brigham Young, and Quilliam Claypen who all
practiced polygamy and enjoyed the fulness of the blessings and other
benefits which came along with being inducted into this inner-circle.

From an article James B. Allen published in the Journal of Mormon
history 1979 titled One Man's Nauvoo: William Clayton's Experience in
Mormon Illinois.

> Clayton was officially instructed in the doctrine \[of polygamy\]
> either in February or March 1843. Joseph Smith then authorized him to
> send for a young lady in England by the name of Sarah Crooks, and even
> offered to furnish the money. Clayton was apparently not shocked, and
> the Prophet proceeded to give more instruction. In later months, as
> Joseph continued to teach him privately, Clayton became convinced that
> "without obedience to that principle no man can ever attain to the
> fullness of exaltation in celestial glory."
>
> Being convinced of a principle is quite different from putting it into
> practice, and therein lay a great human drama for Clayton. He was
> delighted with the possibility that Sarah Crooks would become one of
> his first plural wives since he had known her back in Manchester and
> the two had become very very close. Ruth, too, was acquainted with
> her, and they all got along very well indeed. It is unclear whether
> Joseph actually furnished money for Sarah's passage, but when she
> received a letter that Clayton wrote on 12 February 1843 she
> immediately started out for America.

This excitement was felt by plenty of people who had the idea of
polygamy proposed or taught to them. Polygamy was a polarizing teaching
and for many a test of loyalty to the prophet. The Fosters, the Laws,
and the Higbees all failed the test in Jo's eyes.

Robert Foster, and presumably his brother Charles, began to slip away
from Jo's grasp by early 1844. They both signed a petition to Congress
in the Nauvoo Council's efforts to both get remuneration for the
Missouri-Mormon War and to have Congress recognize Nauvoo as a sovereign
territory. That was signed on November 28, 1843, but dangerous signs had
been making themselves present about the Fosters' loyalty for months by
that point. Charles and Robert Foster signing this memorial was more
symbolic than anything else and was also necessary because both of them
held positions in Nauvoo government.

The Foster brothers signaled their faltering loyalty to Joseph Smith
simply by their day-to-day interactions and the company they kept.
People who'd been this influential and integral to Nauvoo Mormonism not
being inducted into the anointed quorum or Council of Fifty is data by
omission. By virtue of not being included in these secretive groups,
when everything else in Foster's timeline signals that at least Robert
should have been included, it reveals to us that Jo was significantly
questioning their loyalty.

This greatest signal Jo had was the Fosters' association with William
and Wilson Law. The Laws had been causing trouble for the church for
quite some time and anybody who associated with the Laws was a likely
enemy of Jo's church. Specific documents don't reveal the growing
division between Jo and the Fosters here, but the tension which led to
their excommunication must have been present. The Fosters didn't simply
wake up one day and decide to be critics of Joseph Smith and his growing
polygamy ring, the disagreements long predated their excommunication.

The only document I can find that reveals a bit of the growing tension
is a legal case in early April 1844, which was chaired by Dr. Robert D.
Foster as a Justice of the Peace. This was a case where two men were
alleged to have committed perjury in a previous case. I can't find the
case file for the previous case in order to contextualize this specific
case, but A.J. Higbee filed a complaint against A.D. Rhodes and Andrew
Colton for committing perjury in a case against him, A.J. Higbee, from
the week before. A.J. Higbee was a crony of Joseph Smith and it seems
he'd lied on the stand to defend Joseph Smith in some capacity, to which
Andrew Colton and A.D. Rhodes provided testimony contradicting A.J.'s
testimony, attacking the prophet. Jo wanted Colton and Rhodes arrested
for what he considered perjury and they were, indeed, arrested. They
both filed for a writ of habeas corpus, which was heard by Dr. Robert D.
Foster. He granted a hearing, which Jo chaired as mayor and chief
justice of the Nauvoo Municipal Court. Not wanting this to be referred
to Carthage, Jo punted on the writ of habeas corpus and referred it to a
lower court, which Isaac Higbee refused to hear. This wasn't resolved
until September of 1844, but what it did do was effectively demonstrate
to Jo that Robert D. Foster wasn't willing to let this complaint go when
doing so would protect the prophet. Instead he pushed it to the court
and Jo was forced to chair a hearing where he had a vested interest in
the persons remaining in jail to cover up polygamy.

This growing tension can be seen in the court hearing on April 13^th^,
1844. During it, Jo got in a heated exchange with Robert D. Foster and
began lobbing accusatory questions at Foster. Jo was also trying to
press Foster for information on his fellow conspirators who were working
against the prophet. Foster did the only thing he could in the
situation, turned into a stone from which Jo could get absolutely no
information. Jo's reaction is to charge Foster with "unchristianlike
conduct" which provides a window into how liberally Jo used that charge
against his enemies for his entire ministry. From Jo's journal:

> [Dr
> Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#12747433438866156381) said
> he never had a secret interview.---
> with [Dr Goforth](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#4542951683892588570).
> and stated what he \[blank\] \[p. \[83\]\]
>
> Joseph have I ever misused you any
> way? [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#16707082111582294045).
> said I do not feel at liberty to answer this qu\[es\]tion under
> existing circumstances.---
>
> did I ever misuse you? do not feel at libe\[r\]ty to answer
> under existing circumstances.---
>
> Did I ever wrong you in deal personally misused you.--- in
> any shape? [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#15211839490341095971) I
> do not feel at libe\[r\]ty.--- to answer--- I have treated
> you I Christ\[i\]anly and fri\[en\]dly too--- so far as I have had
> ability.--- Jo. tell me where I have done wrong & I will ask
> your forgiveness.------ I want to prove to this company by you\[r\]
> own testim\[o\]ny that \[p. \[84\]\] I have treated you
> honorably.--- [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#2352233438201016068) I
> shall testify no further at pres\[e\]nt.---
>
> A\[ndrew\] Colton come up on Habus \[habeas\] corpus and was
> discharged on the insuffici\[e\]ncy of the
> papers.[202](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#3648398331719789812)
>
> after which. Joseph pref\[er\]red the following charge against Bro [R.
> D
> Fostr](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/113#7502187417188048635)---
> "for unchristin like conduct in general. for abusing my character
> privately. for throwing out slanderous insinuation agist \[against\]
> \[p. \[85\]\] me. for conspir\[i\]ng again\[s\]t my peace & safety.
> for conspiri\[n\]g again\[s\]t my life. for conspiring again\[s\]t the
> peace of my family, and for lying". Joseph Smith

Whatever details of the case I'm having trouble parsing out, the result
is what matters. This case was the last documented straw for the
relationship between Jo and Robert D. Foster. Charles Foster, remember,
is an inferior figure as far as documented history goes because Robert
was much more involved in Nauvoo government, politics, and religious
affairs. Presumably, Charles was on more on board with his brother
Robert than anything that might be done by the Nauvoo leadership.

Just a week after this hearing involving Robert D. Foster and Jo's final
disagreement, the High Council held a meeting. We only learn about this
from the journal of Quilliam Claypen which has a personal touch about
the opposition to polygamy in addition to the general council being
called to cleanse the leadership of polygamy dissenters.

> ...Sarah C\[r\]ook\[s\] has been at my house to day and before she
> left again she shewed her enmity to Joseph and others in full. She has
> got a wicked spirit in her and will be cursed if she do not repent.\
> I also attended in council with the Twelve and High Council on cases
> of the Laws and R D. Foster, when Wm Law and his wife Jane Law, Wilson
> Law and R D. Foster were cut off from the church by unanimous vote.

And, just like that, on April 18^th^, only 7 days after the Council of
Fifty had elected Joseph Smith to be Prophet Priest and King, the Laws
and Robert D. Foster were excommunicated in absentia. Undoubtedly,
Robert D. Foster heard of his excommunication and immediately began to
suspect his life was in danger. This is coming less than a month after
Joseph Smith had named Foster and the Laws specifically in a conspiracy
to murder the prophet. Foster was officially cut off from the church and
the only life insurance he had was his public presence as surgeon
general of the Nauvoo Legion, a Regent of the University of Nauvoo, and
as a relatively wealthy landowner in Nauvoo. So, he had enough public
connections that simply disappearing would cause far too many questions
and Jo had ranted from the pulpit about how much they he and his
coconspirators were enemies of the church, which had its own insurance
effect.

So, now enters the final week of April 1844, Robert D. Foster and
Charles Foster are furious with how they're being treated. Joseph Smith
has engaged in a public character-smearing campaign against the Fosters
and their closest friends. They're surrounded by thousands of people who
see them as de-facto enemies because they were opposed to the prophet.
Even if those thousands of people didn't know the reasons behind the
Fosters being assailed from the pulpit, they knew enough to be a threat
to the Fosters.

The Foster brothers, Charles and Robert, were simply going about their
business one day in late April 1844. John P. Greene, the city marshal,
runs up to them and says you're officers of the Nauvoo Legion and I'm
deputizing you to arrest Augustine Spencer while he's meeting with his
lawyer. The Fosters refused to assist and Joseph Smith himself walks up
behind the marshal and commands them to aid in the arrest of Augustine
Spencer. They refuse again because they view Joseph Smith as a mortal
enemy at this point. Jo was the greatest threat to their wellbeing and
survival and now he's giving them explicit commands to arrest an enemy
of the church leadership. You know what they say about enemies of
enemies. They refuse all his petitions and the situation gets heated.
Joseph is flanked by Pistol Packin' Porter Rockwell, a person who they'd
likely sworn oaths of secrecy with in the past. Harsh words are thrown
back and forth. Robert is wiser than his younger brother, Charles.
Charles realizes he's in mortal danger and the only solution was to draw
his pistol and aim it at the chest of Joseph Smith. Per his training,
Port immediately lunges at Charles and wrenches the pistol from his
hands, saving Joseph's life. Both Charles and Robert are arrested and
taken to the city jail, prisoners of their greatest enemy.

What does a person in this situation do? Joseph Smith was in total
control of their fates. What would you do in this situation? Do you stay
and fight the tyrant? Do you sell your property at rock-bottom prices,
assuming the prophet doesn't tell everybody not to buy from you, and
just leave as quietly and quickly as possible? Do you speak your truth
and hope some follow? How do you stand and fight while insuring your
life? Do you carry the fight to courts outside of Nauvoo at the expense
of all your property, friendships, family connections, and everything
you hold dear?

The options that Charles and Robert Foster had available to them were
incredibly limited and carried heavy consequences. The next issue of the
Nauvoo Neighbor carried the story of what transpired between the Fosters
and the prophet when a pistol was brandished by Charles. How would the
public react to the story?

The May 1^st^ edition of the Nauvoo Neighbor after relating the story
carried the declaration:

> I wish the public to know who it is that makes insurrections and
> disturbs the peace and quiet of the people of the city of Nauvoo and
> in order to do this I need only to tell the world that this R. D.
> Foster is a county magistrate and the same R. D. Foster that was fined
> for gambling a few weeks since... When the wicked rule the people
> mourn: But righteousness exalteth any nation. --*Solomon*\
> J.P. GREENE, City Marshal

The Fosters were brought into the Municipal Court of Nauvoo the very
next day after their arrest. They were convicted of disturbing the peace
each \$100. They were released after this conviction and appealed their
cases to the court at the county seat, Carthage. An additional note
present in Jo's journal here is that Robert Foster accused Willard
Richards while "shaking his fists in \[Richards's\] face" stating
"\[you\] are another Damned black hearted villain. You tried to seduce
[my]{.ul} wife on the boat when she was going to New York.---and I can
prove it." Tensions between Robert Foster and the leadership loyal to Jo
were extremely high during this hearing.

The details of the hearing aren't present on any official paper in the
Nauvoo document register on the Joseph Smith Papers site at least. Where
they are present is in Jo's personal journal kept by Quilliam Claypen.
This is all we know about what transpired during that hearing. After the
hearing, Jo approached Robert Foster in private with a proposal.

> 9 A.M. R. D. Foster come up for trial---after much conversation with
> the Mayor in which he charged Joseph with many crimes Danite-ism in
> Nauvoo---and a great variety of vile & false epithets & charges court
> adjourned to Moday 9 AM.

As a result of the following day's hearing, Jo remanded the case to
Alderman William Marks, who wasn't a crony of his as Jo had declared
from the pulpit that William Marks was a Brutus laying in wait to kill
the prophet. Understandably, Foster objected to the hearing being
transferred on grounds of jurisdiction, but he maybe should have let it
go through because Marks was likely more sympathetic to Foster as an
enemy of polygamy than he was to Jo as the tyrant of Nauvoo. Regardless,
after the first day's hearing, Jo personally visited Robert Foster in
between the two trials. This is the actual end of the affair between
Foster and Jo.

> ---Foster agreed to meet Joseph on 2^nd^---moday of may at the stand
> and have a settleme\[n\]t Foster then said he would publish it Warsaw
> paper---Joseph told him. if he did not agree to be quiety---not
> attempt to raise a mob & he would not meet him---if he would be
> qui\[e\]t he would publish it in Neighbor---Foster would not agree to
> be quiet---and Joseph said he was free from his (Foste\[r'\]s) blood.
> had made the last ove\[r\]ture of peace. delivered him into the hand
> of God & shook his garm\[e\]nts ag\[ain\]st him

This was Jo's plan, propose to Foster that he can print his complaints
with Jo and the church in the Nauvoo Neighbor as long as he keeps quiet.
Did Jo really think that proposition would take? Did he legitimately
think it would work? Regardless, Bob-the-builder Foster rejected the
offer at which point Jo told Foster he was in the Lord's hands, that he
was free from Foster's blood and then Jo shook his garments against
Foster. These are three clear and present signals that the clock had
begun ticking. If he didn't act quickly and deliberately, he and his
brother Charles would disappear. The Danites were coming for him.
Marching orders had been given.

Now Foster had to line a few things up with his brother, the Laws, and
the Higbees, then their survival would be insured. However, that didn't
stop people from visiting Foster to discourage him from going public
with his impending expose.

Meetings were immediately held among Nauvoo elites to determine what to
do about the Fosters and their cohorts. During the Council of Fifty
meeting on May 6^th^, John Taylor reported that he'd met with Robert
Foster. This is what he said:

> Er Taylor reported that he had visited Dr Foster, and had advised him
> to keep still &c, and that all men who professed to be saints must
> support the church &c. Foster said he had no bad feeling & had been
> appeased &c he was ready to meet on any honorable terms or receive any
> communication. He said he could do nothing, his wheels were clogged
> &c.

This sounded like good news to Jo and his entourage, but was it true?
Foster knew Taylor was deep in the Council of Fifty and Quorum of
Apostles; Taylor had only met with Foster on the prophet's direct
orders, so of course he'd conceal his plans from John Taylor. Jo could
see through the misdirection and responded to Taylor's intel:

> The chairman said he \[Foster\] would do nothing again while God gives
> him breath... The chairman decided that Foster and the Higbees were
> included in the last resolution and were all given to the buffetings
> of Satan.

In Council of Fifty terms, those are assassination orders. Jo wanted the
Foster problem to go away and he was putting pieces in place to have the
Fosters removed, but there's strength in numbers. A meeting was held in
the Temple Grove where the Fosters, Higbees, and Laws devised a plan and
a public demonstration, but we're not ready to talk about it just yet.

This same first week of May 1844, the Nauvoo Legion cashiered, or
released, Robert Foster from official duty. He was excommunicated from
the church, his post in the Nauvoo Legion had been taken from him, and
Daniel H. Wells issued a writ of ejectment for anybody who'd purchased
any land from Robert Foster, meaning all the land deeds or contracts
with his name on them were no longer valid. Robert Foster was being
completely starved out of the church and the Council of Fifty meetings
had determined his thread needed to be cut. The walls were closing in on
both Robert and Charles Foster.

The last data point I'll leave everybody with today is this small entry
in Jo's journal for May 7^th^, 1844.

> An opposition printing press arrived at Dr \[Robert D.\] Fosters
> fr\[o\]m Columbus ohio. as report says

The walls were closing in on Charles and Robert Foster, but they were on
the right side of history. Worth brief comment here is the lack of
options Jo had. The walls were closing in on everybody, not just the
dissenters. As time progressed, Jo knew his name would be sullied and he
couldn't keep the secrets under wraps any longer. It was only a matter
of time before he was discovered and what would happen then? If not the
Fosters exposing him, then who? If he doesn't handle this situation with
the Fosters just right, how long before his empire comes collapsing in
and crushes him beneath the weight of the broken and abused system?
Nothing happened in Nauvoo without the knowledge of Joseph Smith, but he
didn't control everything. He was a man who'd shown a penchant for
violent behavior his entire life, especially as a religious leader. How
would he handle the dissent growing from the Fosters, Higbees, and Laws?
Was violence the answer?

Book from Jay Mumford.
