---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 201 - Nauvoo Expositor: A Hat Full of Money'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/7902-2/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-201-nauvoo-expositor-a-hat-full-of-money
category: History
date: 2020-04-03 13:57:52 +0000
---

Ep 201 -- Nauvoo Expositor: A Hat Full of Money

On this episode, we examine the immediate aftermath of the Nauvoo
Expositor being published. The Council of Fifty had some wonderfully
grand plans for themselves and America. We spend a bit of time with the
minutes to get a sense of what they had in mind. There were a lot of
irons in the fire and many members of the Council of Fifty were all over
the United States electioneering and taking high-level meetings for
Joseph Smiths POTUS campaign. Once the Nauvoo Expositor was published,
the city council deliberated for 5 hours about how to handle it. The
contents of the Expositor were a great threat, but the greatest threat
was that which was unknown. What would the next edition contain?

Links:

Council of Fifty Minutes\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#full-transcript>

Memorial to Congress\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/memorial-to-the-united-states-senate-and-house-of-representatives-26-march-1844/4#full-transcript>

JS Nauvoo Journal\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/149#full-transcript>

Nauvoo City Council Minutes\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#full-transcript>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The Nauvoo Expositor had been published. The damage was done. There was
no stopping the Nauvoo public from boiling over at the startling and
salacious revelations contained in the new paper.

All that could be done now was to react. That reaction would carry
important consequences so decisions needed to be made quickly and
wisely.

Let's discuss the issues which factored into the decision-making process
in response to the Nauvoo Expositor. First and foremost, how would the
public react. Thousands of Mormons had attended multiple public meetings
where polygamy had been outright denied multiple times by multiple
church leaders including the prophet himself. The Expositor blasted any
hopes the leadership had of keeping the polygamy revelation only among
private circles as it contained the 3 affidavits from people claiming
they had seen the revelation themselves. How would the general public of
Mormons, especially in Nauvoo, react to knowing there was a higher law
of the church they weren't privy to? Beyond that, Jane Law was a
respectable person in Nauvoo and she claimed the revelation opened the
door for some men to have as many as ten wives. How would that
information impact the women in Nauvoo? For those who hadn't been
approached by church leaders, were they somehow defective or unloyal to
the church? Were they just property to be passed around the leadership
as the leadership pleased? How long until their husband tells them about
a younger wife he wants to marry and she has to agree or be damned? How
would that impact the men who now understood that there was this higher
law of Mormonism but they weren't allowed to access it, by default
making a judgement on their own level of loyalty and commitment to the
church? Why did a neighbor get 3 wives but the majority of men only had
one? And who was going short on a wife so the leadership could have
multiple wives?

These are all just questions about the internal body of Mormons and
their reaction to the Expositor, but what about the outside world? Not
only had denials of polygamy pervaded public statements and sermons
within the Mormon body, but the Nauvoo leadership had engaged in
repeated and vicious attacks on anybody who claimed polygamy was going
on. The Bennett meltdown was only 2 years ago and the church had barely
weathered the public storm from it, but this was a new set of
accusations from people who had actually seen the revelation on paper
and had been members in good standing who were excommunicated. The 7
publishers of the Expositor carried much more credibility than John C.
Bennett and the if the outside world didn't already believe Mormonism
was a sex ring among the leadership they certainly would now. How would
the cultural mores of Protestant monogamy react to this much
substantiation of rumors that had been circulating for over a decade?
How would the outside public react to all the data presented about the
leadership sexually abusing minors and how those young women's demeanors
changed upon being sealed to a much older and more powerful man?

This says nothing of the legal implications. Adultery laws carried stiff
penalties and were grounds for divorce. Polygamy wasn't a legally
recognized form of marriage. Would there be a slew of new lawsuits
against the leadership for repeated counts of perjury and adultery?
Would there be an influx of divorces? Would the leadership be imprisoned
for serial adultery violations? Would Joseph allow himself to be
arrested and tried on the charges this time?

This line of questions leads to another set of much more serious
questions. What if Joseph refused arrest? How would the surrounding
non-Mormon settlements react to his even further abuse of power in
Nauvoo? How would the Governor deal with the incredible power Jo held?
Would the Nauvoo Charter be revoked now or after the next edition of the
Expositor? Would the anti-Mormon political parties renew their attacks
on the Nauvoo kingdom? Could the leadership keep order in the city with
this new outrage? How would they stop the Expositor from printing more
editions which would only increase the urgency and direness of the
consequences of every decision the leadership made?

There were just so many questions in the air and there was no getting
pandora back into its box. The major problem here is so many pieces
still weren't in place. The leadership had determined multiple
resettlement locations and had sent numerous scouts to them to talk to
local governments and Native groups to negotiate a new Mormon settlement
further away from civilization and state governments, but none of the
plans were yet ready to execute and the main projects of Nauvoo, the
temple and the Nauvoo House, were yet to be completed. The 1844 election
hadn't run its course yet. The best laid plans of mice and men were now
in the process of going awry. The Mormon empire, and its aspirations for
global theocratic supremacy, had suffered a fatal blow, but nobody knew
that just yet.

The day the Nauvoo Expositor was published and disseminated the City
Council was in almost constant meetings about what to do. Notably, the
Council of Fifty had their final meeting before Jo and Hyrum's deaths on
May 31^st^, 1844 while the Nauvoo Expositor was published on June 7th.
They met about various affairs concerning their grand plans for the
United States before the Nauvoo Expositor was published. However, after
this final May meeting, the Council of Fifty never reconvened before the
Carthage shootout. Why did they never reconvene? Because they couldn't
form a quorum. Why couldn't they form a quorum? Because so many of the
members of the Council of Fifty were all over the United States carrying
out the plans of the Council of Fifty and electioneering for Joseph
Smith's presidential bid.

Page after page in the minute book, kept by Quilliam Claypen, are filled
with treasonous screeds about the overthrow of the government. One of
the stated purposes of the Nauvoo Expositor was to show the world how
much power Joseph Smith had gained and how dangerous he really was. No
single document detailed his power and his ultimate goals more than the
Council of Fifty minutes. These are the minutes Jo would instruct
Quilliam Claypen to burn or bury as he was being taken to Carthage. Jo
knew how treasonous this document was. So let's spend a little time with
it.

The April 18^th^ meeting, for example, included White-out Willard
Richards presenting to the Council the constitution of the United States
under a Mormon theocracy which pulls from the constitution as it stood,
but altered language significantly.

> We, the people of the Kingdom of God, knowing that all power emanates
> from God, that the earth is his possession, and he alone has the right
> to govern the nations and set in order the kingdoms of this world;
> that he only has a right to institute laws and establish decrees for
> the government of the human family;...
>
> We have supplicated the great I am, that he would make known his will
> unto his servants, concerning this, his last kingdom, and the law, by
> which his people shall be governed: And the voice of the Lord unto us
> was,\--Verily thus saith the Lord, this is the name by which you shall
> be called, the kingdom of God and his Laws, with the keys and power
> thereof, and Judgement in the hands of his servants, Ahman Christ,...
>
> Art. 1^st^. I Am, the Lord they God, ruleing the armies of heaven
> above, and among the nations of the earth beneath... I alone have a
> right to judge the inhabitants of the earth, which is my footstool;
> and I will acknowledge no other law, rule, power, Authority or
> dominion, than that which is instituted by me, the great I Am, and no
> other government, Kingdom, Dominion, authority, power, rule, or law,
> shall be acknowledged by my people.
>
> Art. 2^nd^. I the lord will do nothing but what I have revealed or
> shall reveal unto my servants the prophets and I have appointed one
> man, holding the keys and authority pertaining to my holy priesthood,
> to whom I will reveal my laws, my statutes, my ordinances, my
> Judgements, my will and pleasure concerning my kingdom on the earth.
>
> Art. 3^rd^. And my Servant and Prophet whom I have called and chosen
> shall have power to appoint Judges and officers in my kingdom...

The men in this specific counsel meeting opined that "entering on this
subject they were treading on holy ground." Adding that, "In
contemplating the situation of nations and our situation, they feel
placed in a delicate position. They cant refer to any constitution of
the world because they are corrupt." They seemed to truly believe that
"If all the wisdom and knowledge of this council is exerted we can do
something, and when we have done all we can we can come to the great God
and obtain the perfect law." George A. Smith added in that same meeting
that "It is a law of nations that protection binds a man to his
sovereign, but as soon as the law ceases to protect a man in his rights
he is free. We, as a people have not been protected, consequently we are
free." In a near-prophetic allusion to future policies at Brigham Young
University, George A. Smith added "He wants to have the privilege of
wearing his beard till it grows as long as his arm if he wants to, while
it does not stick into another mans face." Some of us can even resonate
with the different set of rules that different classes of people follow
when Smith added this "It is an acknowledged fact that in Washington or
New York a man with \$10.000 in his pocket can murder his friend or
neighbor and walk off without molestation." Smith didn't state
specifically that a man can shoot somebody on 5^th^ avenue and still be
elected president, but the sentiment is the same.

Other meetings leading up to the final meeting on May 31^st^ are equally
or more treasonous. Beyond the meetings themselves being treasonous, the
deliberations in the meetings themselves turned into actions. They not
only workshopped ideas here, but formed plans and put them into action.
For example, part of the memorial sent to Congress asking for \$2mn of
relief and claiming Nauvoo as a sovereign territory, Jo asked the
government for 100,000 volunteers to extend the boundaries of the United
States to the west coast. This whole plan was conceived in the Council
of Fifty. The first location in their scope of Mormon religious conquest
was the Oregon territory, but to do this Jo would need to be an
officially recognized general of the United States armed forces instead
of just the Nauvoo Legion. Once they'd deliberated how this was to be
carried out, the Council of Fifty sent Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt to
Washington D.C. to present the documents to Congress and Orson Hyde sent
back 5 letters to the Council of Fifty detailing his progress. Both
Orsons Pratt and Hyde were in steady conversation with a few powerful
men in politics, John Wentworth, James Semple, and Stephen A. Douglass.
Stephen Douglass is a curious figure in his history with the Mormons.
He'd helped get the Nauvoo Charter passed and had granted Jo multiple
writs of habeas corpus when the Nauvoo Municipal court wasn't powerful
enough to grant them. In conversation with Orson Pratt, Stephen Douglass
said "he would resign his seat in Congress, fi he could command the
force that Mr. Smith could, and would be on the march to that \[Oregon\]
couuntry in a month." Meaning he'd be happy to give up his current
position of political power if it meant he could command a portion of
the 100,000 volunteers Jo petitioned for to take and settle Oregon
territory.

Stephen Douglass had given a fair bit of education to the Orsons about
how politics in Washington actually work. "I have learned this much;
that if we want Congress to do any thing for us; in drawing up our
memorial, we must not ask, what is right in the matter; but we must ask,
what kind of a thing will Congress pass? Will it suit the politicks of
the majority? Will it be popular or unpopular? For you might as will
drive a musket ball through a cotton bag, or the gospel of Christ
through the heart of a priest, case hardened by sectarianism, bigotry
and superstition, or a Camel through the eye of a needle, as to drive
any thing through Congress that will operate against the popularity of
politicians."

Douglass had cast his lot in with the Mormons and he'd even acquired a
very desirable asset and gave it to the Orsons to help the Mormon
mission.

> Judge Douglass has given me a map of Oregon, and also a report on an
> exploration of the country lying between the Missouri River and the
> Rocky Mountains on the line of the Kansas, and great Platte Rivers; by
> Lieut. J\[ohn\] C. Fremont of the Corps of topographical Engineers. On
> receiving it, I expressed a wish that Mr. Smith could see it. Judge
> D\[ouglass\]. Says it is a public document, and I will frank it to
> him. I accepted his offer, and the book will be forthcoming to him.
> The people are so eager for it here, that they have even stole it out
> of the Library... Judge D. borrowed it of Mr \[Thomas Hart Benton\]. I
> was not to tell any one in this city wh\[ere\] I got it. The book is a
> most valuable document to any one contemplating a journey to Oregon...
>
> Judge D. says he can direct Mr Smith to several gentlemen in
> California who will be able to give him any information on the state
> of affairs in that country, and when he returns to Ill. He will visit
> Mr. Smith.

This map from John C. Fremont's corps of cartographers and engineers
became a very precious commodity and it was the same map used by Bloody
Brigham Young and various other breakoff factions to determine
settlement locations. They couldn't just google map search for "place to
settle 20,000 people". Intel needed to be acquired and Stephen Douglass
was a powerful ally to have. And yes, this is the one and same Stephen
Douglass who would be Abraham Lincoln's presidential opponent in about 2
decades. Douglass was banking on the Mormon movement to succeed in their
ultimate goals and according to Orson Hyde, "Judge Douglass says he
would... as soon go to that country without an act of Congress as with;
"and that in 5 years a noble state might be formed, and then if
\[Congress\] would not receive us in the union, we would have a
government of our own."" Douglass was an opportunist and if the Mormon
empire somewhere in the west provided greater opportunities for
Douglass, he'd resign from his seat in Congress and help with the Mormon
mission of theocracy-building. He even stole a precious map for them,
government property, and told them not to tell anybody where they got
it. Douglass even voiced his support for the Memorial to Congress asking
for \$2mn of relief from the Missouri troubles and 100,000 soldiers to
take Oregon.

In a previous meeting, responding to these letters from Orson Pratt, "Er
\[Lyman\] Wight suggested that Judge Douglas wanted to go to Oregon and
be president and Joseph go as prophet super numerary, and then it would
all be right and constitutional." Except, establishing a sovereign
theocracy in the boundaries of United States territories is exactly not
constitutional. But this statement from Wight captures the mentality of
the Council of Fifty and the Mormon leadership. Do something, regardless
of legality, then deal with the consequences if there are any. Laws
don't matter if we're not held to them. We're abiding by the a higher
law than that of the land so anything we do must be legal in the kingdom
of god, kingdom of the United States and its constitution be damned.

The Council of Fifty drafted a response to Orson Hyde's letter talking
about Stephen Douglass and the progress of the memorial. Hyde had
suggested that the memorial would more likely pass if a specific
provision was stricken. That provision gave Joseph Smith legal
recognition as a general, but Orsons Hyde and Pratt knew that it was the
most controversial of all the provisions. Sure, they could ask for
\$2mn, sure they can ask for 100,000 volunteer soldiers, but having Jo
recognized as a legitimate general was a step too far. Accordingly,
Orson Pratt struck that provision from the memorial to Congress and
handed it to James Semple, a senator who'd also sat on the Illinois
state supreme court and was very well-connected in Illinois and national
politics, for submission. The Council's response is quite amazing.

> their decided dis-approbation and indignation at the course pursued
> by [Mr
> Hyde](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#1851710060802471978) in
> his conversation with [Mr
> Semple](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#14765761999981142609) in
> proposing to erace that portion of the memorial relative to Mr Smith's
> being constituted a "member of the [United
> States](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#74391970758109050) Army"
>
> The council were surprised at such conduct after all that was said
> to [Mr
> Hyde](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#15618220448492850214) before
> his departure. To throw away that one item, is to throw away the
> whole Memorial. And the delegation
> from [Nauvoo](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#769999960065693110) at [Washington](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#3803054163118701916) are
> instructed by the Council to push the Memorials through
> Congress Unaltered, or die in the attempt.
>
> If [Mr
> Semple](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#11016536987791688574) is
> so ignorant as to suppose that Congress has not the power to grant
> such a memorial.--- He has no need to suppose for a moment that we are
> such fools that we do not know better. We know that Congress has the
> right and the power and they shall grant it unaltered or refuse, and
> they can act their pleasure which they do.
>
> It is an insult to their constituents for the representatives or
> Senators
> of [Illinois](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#12766559863994665312) to
> propose such amendments or raise such foolish, childish, ignorant and
> cowardly objections as referred to in [Mr
> Hyde](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#3583683156818602458)s
> Letters, and all Representatives and Senators who do not use their
> influence as is their duty to do to pass the Memorials unaltered shall
> be politically damned. We do thank [Mr
> Semple](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#10819821361845451315) for
> what he has done. It is now time for him and Congress to awake,
> and learn that the people are the sovereigns and Congress as their
> servants are \<​is​\> bound to
> obey.[515](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#14156216204110612293) Neither
> shall we stop to enquire of Congress what is popular or unpopular, but
> we will tell them what is right and what is
> wrong;[516](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#4042831201777078801) and
> if they will not make right popular, we will turn them out, and put
> men there who will.

The Council of Fifty balked at the idea that Hyde would just strike one
of the most important provisions from the memorial just to make it more
likely to pass. In their eyes, the government is supposed to work for
them and they could toss around the Mormon voting bloc which was quite a
bargaining chip in Illinois politics, but held much less sway at the
federal level. That's understandable because the Mormon voting bloc was
like 5,000 people, which is a lot, but there were like 9 million voting
Americans in the states and territories at this time so that 5,000 was
barely a drop in the bucket. Jo and the Council's disapproval of Orson
Hyde's political bargaining was captured in this letter and taken in
hand by Lyman Wight and Heber the Creeper Kimball to go to Washington to
work with the Orsons, Stephen Douglass, and James Semple to get the
memorial passed as it stood.

It wasn't just in D.C. where members of the Council of Fifty were taking
these high-level meetings. A guy named James Emmett was called to go on
a mission to meet with a Menominee chief to get him to ally with the
Mormons during their next resettlement. This was all part of Jo's plan,
to gather American soldiers with freed slaves and oppressed Native
Americans to build the greatest army the world had ever seen. James
Emmett returned from this mission on May 31^st^ and gave his report
before the Council of Fifty; it wasn't a success.

> After some conversation on promiscuous subjects by the members, the
> chairman \[Joseph Smith\] remarked that the object of our meeting was
> to hear brother Emmetts report who has just returned from his
> mission...
>
> Er J. Emmett then remarked that he started from here a few days after
> his appointment by the council. He met brother \[Alexander\] Bedlam at
> Galena. They proceeded thence to Black River and Prarie Du Chien...
> They stopped at a trading house where they expected the Indian Agent
> to come soon. The brother went back from this place. The agent did not
> come. The Indians were not gathered. The chief of the Menomanee tribe
> came into Town. I put up with him. He is a very agreeable man, but
> could not speak English. A half breed came who was well learned in the
> English language but I had no confidence in him. I conversed with the
> chief, upon the object of my mission, and the old man acknowledged the
> plan to be good but doubted whether it could be carried into effect. I
> concluded I would come home and see what further council would be
> given under the circumstances.

Lyman Wight had established a bit of a working relationship with the
Menominee tribe during the Pineries mission which concluded in April.
Emmett's mission up there was to collect data about how willing the
Menominee were to ally with the Mormon revolution movement as Lyman had
told them. He didn't make much headway and Joseph was displeased with
Emmett's performance, ordering Emmett "to make another attempt and
fulfil the mission according to the orders of the council." If the
Mormon were going to overthrow the American government, they needed all
the help and allies they could get. They wouldn't get very far without
the help of Native Americans and they chose to start with the Menominee.

Other political machinations centered on the forefront of the Council of
Fifty's mind. They had a lot of irons heating up but one iron that
immediately needed tending to was who would be Jo's running mate for
POTUS. Willard Richards and a few other leading men in the Mormon
movement had petitioned some well-connected friends asking them to be
Vice President to Jo's campaign. All of those had fallen flat or didn't
receive a response. It was time to look inward.

At the meeting on May 6^th^, the question was discussed among everything
else that was going on. The rival church had just been established by
the Laws, a printing press was on its way to Robert D. Foster's home for
printing the prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor and Hingepin Sidney
Rigdon had met with William, Jane, and Wilson Law to try and calm them
down to no success. The Council meeting that day is kind of all over the
place as they discussed so many things during the meeting which
transpired over nearly 5 and a half hours with a short recess for lunch.

Er Rigdon consented to run for the vice precidency if the council
wished.

Other members were totally on board with this proposal.

> Er Wight reminded Er Rigdon of a certain prophecy, that the Lord
> promised to vex the nations and the nation could not be vexed worse
> than for Joseph to be president and brother Rigdon vice President.
>
> Er Rigdon referred to a former prophecy and said I am satisfied God
> intends to do just what we are doing
>
> The chairman \[Joseph Smith\] confirmed it.

But, Hingepin Rigdon had conditions to being Jo's running mate.

> Er Rigdon asked the privilege,\--after Joseph had been President 4
> years, that he should be president the next term which was granted,
> and he stated that as the Lord God lives Joseph shall be President
> next term and I will follow him.

It was decided immediately after this that Rigdon should move to
Pennsylvania, his home state, and become a permanent resident in order
to gain the Pennsylvania vote in the coming election. After that
resolution was carried unanimously, "\[Joseph Smith\] made some remarks
about electioneering, in reference to mass meetings, caucuses &c." Jo
also used this as the opportunity to win a fight he'd been having with
Rigdon for over 2 years by this point; Rigdon named Jo the new
postmaster general and Jo appointed a small committee to be the
transition team in the following meeting.

Now that Jo had a running mate and there was a tangible plan in the
works, members of the Council of Fifty needed to be sent to caucus and
electioneer for Jo. "Er Miller proposed that Er Rich go to Kentucky
instead of Michigan. Er. Rich said he was willing to go any where. Er
\[Brigham\] Young explained and objected unless Er \[Samuel\] Bent go to
Michigan. Er Rich explained and proposed going with Er Miller." Other
meeting minutes in following meetings detail the vastness and extent of
Jo's political web expanding across the nation. Some historians will
claim that this was more of a symbolic presidential campaign or a
protest campaign, but that doesn't mean these guys didn't take it very
seriously. They took every angle they possibly could to make a
legitimate bid for the presidency. The Council of Fifty sent men to
multiple states, Congress, to meet with Native American groups, and even
sent Lucian Woodworth to Texas who had meetings with President Sam
Houston to work out the Mormon settlement there. The tendrils of the
Mormon political machine were being pulled and articulated by the
nucleus in Nauvoo and everybody was running at maximum capacity.

But it was all a futile attempt. During all of these political
machinations, the Nauvoo Expositor was published, defiling the Mormon
leadership with salacious accusations about polygamy and the degradation
of any wall separating politics and religion in the Mormon kingdom. Once
again, it wasn't so much what the Expositor published in its first
printing that was a major issue, although it was quite controversial. It
was the specter of what it may publish in the future which represented a
greater threat to Jo and the Mormon political machine. To be clear,
everything we've discussed today were the plans at the highest-ranking
levels of the church. The average member, of which there were something
like 20,000 of them, had no idea these meetings were happening or what
transpired in these meetings. Only a few called and selected leaders had
access to Talos, the Mormon War Machine currently under construction.
These were very secretive plans. The Mormons believed that the United
States would be visited with a sore vexation, but they didn't know that
the ingredients for that vexation were being acquired and curated by an
elite set of men who held the keys to the kingdom.

When the Expositor was published, the questions we opened this episode
with all became a stark reality and an answer was required by the
leadership. They simply couldn't allow the Nauvoo Expositor to continue
publishing more about the Nauvoo empire. As soon as the Expositor landed
in the hands of thousands of people in and around Nauvoo, the
leadership, including Jo, took action. Jo's journal, recorded by William
Clayton (Quilliam Claypen), details what transpired over the following
days.

The day it was slated to be published Jo met with Robert D. Bob the
Builder Foster, one of the publishers and the printer of the paper.
According to Jo's journal, and we don't have any details beyond this
about the meeting, it didn't go over well and Foster circulated rumors
about the meeting. What actually happened is pretty tough because we
don't have anything beyond this document to work with, but we can tease
a little bit out of what Quilliam Claypen recorded.

> R D. Foster called profess\[e\]dly to make some concessions\--&return
> to the chu\[r\]ch wanted a private interview which I declined---told
> him---I would choose individuals. & he might choose othe\[r\]s\--& we
> would meet.---and I would settle eve\[r\]y thing on righteo\[u\]s
> p\[r\]inciples.

This is a relatively cryptic entry in Jo's journal. Righteous principles
was such a fluid term like shedding innocent blood or new and
everlasting covenant. There's the text and then the subtext beneath it.
Righteous principles in Jo's world meant anything which contributed to
the expansion of his own power and the general welfare of the Mormon
kingdom. Righteous principles could incorporate everything from signing
land contracts to giving people money to granting a meeting with a
powerful politician. So, when Jo said that he would settle the issue
with Robert D. Foster on righteous principles it could mean so many
different things. The next line in Jo's journal reveals what could have
been meant by the previous lines.

> report was circulated in the evining that Foster said. I would
> r\[ec\]eive h\[i\]m on any terms and give him a hat full of dollars
> into the bargain

The cryptic entry from before could certainly mean that Jo feared the
Nauvoo Expositor being published and tried to buy Foster's silence.
Foster, of course, rejected the offer because he knew Jo's word was good
for nothing and this was personal. He'd struggled under the oppressive
thumb of Jo for months and the Nauvoo Expositor was how he could fight
back. Simply giving that all up for a hat full of money wasn't a
proposal Foster was willing to entertain. Besides, he had 6 other
co-publishers who would all need to be paid off for this to work. But,
for all 7 of them, this was personal and money often does nothing to fix
personal grievances. No settlement and NDA would make this scandal go
away as is the case with the church today.

The evening following Jo's daytime meeting with Foster, the Expositor
hit shelves and had thousands of readers by nightfall. The next day Jo
met with the city council. This wasn't the Council of Fifty because most
of them were outside Nauvoo on political errands for Jo's campaign. This
also wasn't the High Council because the majority of those guys were
also members of the Council of Fifty and once again, they were all out
of town. This was a meeting of the city council, supposed to be a
secular committee for the government of Nauvoo, but the lines between
city and church weren't just blurry, they didn't exist, thus one of the
primary complaints of the Nauvoo Expositor and most other exposes about
Nauvoo Mormonism.

The city council meeting for June 8^th^ is incredibly fascinating and
we're going to read through a bunch of it today. They had a few items
slated for discussion that day. They discussed some stuff about roads
surveys and the road construction committee. They got into a pretty
heated discussion about the liquor sales in the city and Jo denied that
Pistol Packin' Porter Rockwell had sold any liquor at the Nauvoo Mansion
since the last prohibition ordinance went into effect, which was a
blatant lie. They discuss a few other sundry affairs but we're concerned
with their discussions about the Nauvoo Expositor, mobocracy, and
bogus-making (counterfeit coins). How does counterfeiting fit into all
of this? Counterfeiting was a common accusation against anybody who
needed to be seen as unreliable. It was a form of character
assassination and Jo made a concerted effort during this city council
meeting to brand the Laws, along with Joseph H. Jackson, as
counterfeiters to make them even more monstrous and untrustworthy. I'm
going to read a bunch from the meeting minutes and comment as we go
because it is absolutely remarkable. There's a bunch that was stricken
through, some of which is really bad, which denotes a point of
discussion that was to be removed from the record after the discussion
was had. I'll read through those stricken through portions if they're
relevant and also do my best to read this so it's understandable in
audio format. It starts off with Jo ranting about Sylvester Emmons, the
editor of the Nauvoo Expositor and a non-Mormon member of the city
council.

> \<​X​\> Mayor referrd to--- [Counciller \[Sylvester\]
> Emmons](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#8012629783885616218)---
> and ~~proposd~~ \<​suggested​\> the popropriety of purging the city
> counil ~~first~~ ~~at~~ ~~Nuisan~~ ~~\<​of​\>~~ ~~Nuisances~~ The man
> who steps forward to put down iniquity is the fir\[s\]t to be put down
> by the people of
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#8853369926371580688). ~~Mayor~~ ~~said~~ ~~if~~ ~~he~~ ~~had~~ ~~kept~~ ~~a~~ ~~whore~~ ~~from~~ [~~[Canada]{.ul}~~](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10394491479390968690) ~~here~~--- ~~and~~ ~~since~~, ~~&
> had~~ ~~done~~ ~~every~~ ~~thing~~--- ~~would~~ ~~have~~ ~~been~~ ~~as~~ ~~good
> a~~ ~~man~~ ~~as~~ ~~[[William
> \[Law\]]{.ul}](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10443624766227219645) &~~ [~~Wilson~~ ~~Law~~](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#4771934069654799837).--- 

This is super notable here because Jo was talking about one of the
Lawrence sisters who knew the Laws before the Laws and Lawrences
immigrated to Nauvoo. The Lawrences also featured prominently in the
Nauvoo Expositor as William Law provided descriptions of how their
demeanor changed after they had been married to Jo.

> [~~T~~ ~~Turley~~](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1401192630949306902) \<​[Theodore
> Turly](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#169921482461488939) sworn​\>
> said \<​the​\> Laws had brought \<​Bogus​\> dies to him to fix--- [H.
> Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2254041750871143820):
> referred to [Dr. \[Robert D.\]
> Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#7661652328156993324).
> his brothrs, & the Higbys. & asked what good they had ever done? Where
> is the \<​first​\> act of goodness and greatness
> in [Wilson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2738130722603161972) & [William
> Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12927076361657057759)?---
> While Joseph was under arrest, Laws
> & [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12849182945075834432) would
> have ben rode on a rail if ~~I~~ \<​he​\> had not ~~have~~ stepped
> forward to prevent it.---
>
> Mayor.--- said--- at the time he was under
> arrest [W^[m]{.ul}^ Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#16377766354403093538) pu\[r\]sued
> him for \$40.00 he was owing
> said [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12026453627307105855),
> and it took the last expnc mony he had,--- to pay it.---

Not only are the Laws engaging in bogus-making, but they didn't even
help Jo when he was arrested and when Jo needed money to pay legal fees
William pushed Jo to give up his last 40 dollars. These assertions range
from misconstruing the truth to outright lies. The Laws were paramount
in helping Jo escape the law in 1843 when he was doomed to extradition
to Missouri. Law pursued Jo for that money to help pay for Jo's legal
counsel, not out of malice as portrayed here. Whether or not the Laws
were engaging in Bogus is up for debate but Joseph Smith CERTAINLY was
in the bogus-making business; at least, his cronies were and he
benefitted financially from it. Next it talks about Joseph H. Jackson
and the rumors he'd spread about Jo proposing to Jane Law, and Jo
attempting to assassinate William and then William Law apparently trying
to hire Jackson to kill Jo. It's all a mess and we'll do a deep dive on
Joseph H. Jackson sometime in the next few weeks, I just have to figure
out how best to fit that puzzle piece into the larger picture here.

> C, [H.
> Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3067298579766588612) continud
> and referred. to [J\[oseph\] H.
> Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1762081714749846335)------ coming
> to this place. &c---
>
> Mayor
> said [W^[m]{.ul}^ L.](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3783410872233821632) Had
> offered [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5003829863634160007) \$5,00
> dollars to kill him.
>
> \<​C.​\> [H.
> Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#17847358061397182507) continued, [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3694135691530188183),
> told ~~me~~ \<​him​\> he ment to have ~~my~~ \<​his​\>
> daughter, [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#6991329850526691159) laid
> a plan with 4 or 5 persns, to kidnap his daughter, & thrnted
> \[threatened\] to Shoot any man that should come near after he got him
> in the skiff--- was Engaged in trying to make Bogus \<​which​\> was
> his princple business.---

It's super hard to nail down fact from fiction here. It's notable that
this was the city council and not the Council of Fifty. City Council
meetings required prudence and the highest-ranking leadership to be
guarded in what they said, as opposed to the Council of Fifty where they
could speak very freely because the meetings were shrouded in secrecy.
So, to some extent, what was recorded in the City Council meeting
minutes we're reading here was censored or propagandized to begin with
to make out the Laws and Jackson to be complete monsters. It's all very
complicated.

> referred to the revelation read to the High council.--- that it was in
> answer to a qustion concenig \[concerning\] things which transpired in
> former days & had no refene \[reference\] to the penst \[present\]
> time.------ 

Uhhhh that's an outright lie by Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. If not for
that revelation falling into the hands of William and Jane Law, the
Nauvoo Expositor likely never would have happened. It continues to go
through other printers of the Expositor and slander their characters.
Maybe it was slander, maybe these accusations are real. I'm inclined to
not believe anything that was said about these people in this specific
meeting.

> that [W^[m]{.ul}^ Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10065821891984937519) when
> sick said \<​he had been guilty of adultry &​\> he was not fit to live
> or die, had Sinnd again\[s\]t his own soul &c \[p. 13\] who was [judge
> Emmons](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#452528602907118661)---
> when he came here had scarc 2 shi\[r\]ts------ was dandld by the
> authorities of
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#4374231548331696590).---
> Now. Editor--- of the Expositor--- his right hand man [\<​Francis​\>
> Higby \[Francis M.
> Higbee\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5705260338930644360) who ~~he~~ Confesd
> to ~~him~~ \<​the speaker​\> he had had the Pox,---
> &c------ [Emmons](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#15044821219575323263) has
> lifted his hand againt the municipality of God Almighty, and the curse
> of God shall rest upon him.
>
> ~~Mr.~~ Washington Peck Sworn--- said, soon after [J. H.
> Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10620428560827925477) came
> heare said [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#16266662111896247229) came
> to him--- and wa\[n\]ted to ~~have~~ \<​loan​\>
> some ~~need~~ \<​moeny​\> \<​Witness​\> let him have some, and took
> some jewelry as security, Soon after--- a man from across the river
> came after the
> jewelry [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2092059669276129144) had
> stolen it from him, ~~or~~ ~~loaned~~ ~~it~~ ~~of~~ ~~him~~.---
>
> at anothr time wanted to get money--- ~~he should enlist in bogus
> making~~ asked ~~me~~ ~~if~~ \<​witness​\> if he would do any thing
> dishonorable, to get, a living--- said he would
> not.--- [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#9136490400539181778) \<​said​\> ~~he~~ \<​witness​\>
> was a \<​damd​\> fool he could get a living a deal easier
> than ~~then~~ he was then doing------ \<​by making Bogus​\> some men
> high in the chu\[r\]ch were engaged in the business--- \<​witness
> asked if it was Joseph--- No
> said [Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2899500695206841148).
> I dare not tell it to Joseph​\> ~~but~~ ~~not~~ ~~Joseph~~.
> Witness understood, the Laws were engaged in it---
> \<​[Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12433139322723467850) said
> he​\> would be the death of witness if he ever went to Joseph or
> any one to tell of what he had said...

After all this about Joseph H. Jackson, the council next turns their ire
back toward Sylvester Emmons, the Expositor's editor. They determined to
suspend Emmons as city counselor and lament that he'd never before
exhibited any malice or trouble toward the leadership but now seems to
want to "destroy those ordinances and \[Nauvoo City\] charter" he'd help
to instate. They announce an investigation into him. After that they go
back to discussing Jackson and bogus-making. Once again, it's really
hard to distinguish fact from fiction here.

> [Lorenzo \[D.\]
> Wasson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12229460694061655056) Sworn
> said [Joseph H
> Jackson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#310067952121865018) told [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#6679439908758125626) that
> Bogus ~~Business~~ \<​Making​\> was going on in
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10029965015158441040),
> but it was too damnd small business. he
> wanted [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#18391173145846575521) to
> help him to p\[r\]ocure Money \<​for the Gen was afraid. to go into
> it--- &​\> with \$500.00 he could get an engraving \<​for bills​\> on
> the Bank
> of [Mo.](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12090872734754984371) and
> one on the State of [New
> York](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#741537386155490394).---
> and could make money.--- said
> many times [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3687248446958706332) did
> not know him. ~~Mayor~~, Said he believed the Gen had been
> telling ~~me~~ \<​[witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12405342641017516680)​\>
> something; God Dam him if he has I will kill him.--- \<​& swore he​\>
> would kill any man that should prove a traitor to him.--- Said if
> he could get a company of men to suit him he would go onto the
> frontier and live by highway Robbery--- \<​for he​\> had got sick of
> the world.

Next the council meeting switches back to discussing the grog shops and
other places where liquor was sold, reading prohibition ordinances, and
determining that the city marshal should stake out the places they
suspected of selling liquor to collect data. The City Council was simply
ensuring Jo's monopoly on alcohol in Nauvoo. After that they get into
how payments from fines assessed by the city municipal court should be
divvied up and Jo overruled everybody, but then we finally get to the
most crucial aspect of this city council meeting. Now they begin to
discuss how to deal with the Nauvoo Expositor.

> Mayor Suggested that council pass an ordinanc to prevent
> misrepresentation ~~of~~ & Libellous publicati\[o\]n, and wanted a law
> passed to p\[r\]event all, conspiracy against the peace of
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#7019083159283531039).---

This is super important. The Nauvoo Charter was already quite an
expansive document which granted incredible power to the Mormon
leadership, but Jo had also tailored the laws and ordinances of Nauvoo
to fit his every need and whim. He liked to play by his own rules so
when it comes to slanderous or libelous publications, Jo was kind of the
arbiter of what constituted libel and slander. We now have the doctrine
of New York v. Sullivan and a bunch of other supreme court case law
which deals with what constitutes slander of public figures but Nauvoo
in 1844 predated any of our current juris prudence. The fact remains
though, truth was and always is an absolute defense in slander cases.
The Nauvoo Expositor has yet to be disproven in any single point it
made, particularly with factual claims as it relates to the polygamy
revelation. The publishers of the Expositor stuck to the truth so no
court would rule what they said as slander or libelous... except for the
Nauvoo Municipal court, which is exactly where Jo wanted the case
adjudicated. If he could bring in the 7 publishers of the Nauvoo
Expositor to the Nauvoo Municipal Court on charges of slander, like he'd
done individually with at least 3 of the publishers before, he could
make the whole thing go away. The court would rule in his favor and the
7 publishers would appeal the case to the circuit court at Carthage and
Jo would hopefully get Stephen A. Douglass to rule in his favor as he'd
done a couple of times throughout the 1840s. Jo had enough political
capital to wage this fight if he could just get a libelous publication
law pushed through the Nauvoo city council. They would get it passed,
but not today. However, he took another step beyond passing this new
ordinance which was his greatest mistake. Next the City Council goes on
to talk about the claim Robert Foster had made the day before about Jo
offering a hat full of money to shut up and not print the Expositor.

> ~~ordinance read~~--- \<​Mayor said he had never made any proposals
> to [Fostre](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3685441285289603863) to
> come Back. [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#9633239104737247079) proposed
> to come back come to ~~me~~ \<​his​\> house and wanted a private
> interviw Mayor ~~said~~ \<​told​\> him ~~I~~ \<​he​\> would have no
> private inte\[r\]view--- had some conversati\[o\]n
> with [foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5598067274512518231).
> in the hall, in presince of several.​\>
>
> ~~Mayor~~ related to Council Convesation
> with [D^r^ Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#6062662709358577164). and
> read a letter
> from [D^r^ Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#8109239776146018248).---
> \<​dated​\> June 7^th^ and when he left my house he went to a shew
> shop on the hill--- and said that Joseph said if he would come back he
> would give
> him [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#9758934423798659683)s
> place in the church & a hart full of specie,--- and
> then ~~read~~ \<​wrote​\> the Letter Just read

I looked all over the net and the Joseph Smith Papers and could not find
that letter for the life of me. However, as was always the case with
these matters, witnesses were produced to corroborate Jo's side of the
story.

> [Lucin Woodwrth \[Lucien
> Woodworth\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#9637927146209968617),
> sworn--- stated that the conversatin as stated by the mayer was
> correct,--- was prsent May 7^th^ A M 10
> At [Mansion](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#17280220320992826972). [Dr
> Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10071745318644620647) rode
> up enqurd \[enquired\] if Gen Smith was at
> home, [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#9309631349904731709) told
> him he beleved he
> was. [D^r^ Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1643873326898440050) went
> in to the
> house, [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10224626226667806790) went
> in. [D^r^](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#14515708422022833334) was there,
> the general & othrs looking at some speciman of penmanship, Somthng
> was said respecting a convesatin at that time, between the Gen
> & [D^r^](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3854258588163218691),
> Gen Smith
> observed to [foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2334987771456584292).
> if he had a convesation he would want
> others present, [Dr](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#396388727009404634) said
> he would have a word with him by himself--- and went into the
> Hall. [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#14901418002618578735) ~~was~~ \<​went​\> to
> the door, that he might see and hear, what was passing--- they still
> continud to talk on the subjct of a convesation that they might have,
> afterwa\[r\]d with others present, that Mr Smith might choose,
> and ~~those~~ that [D^r^ Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#20386635517582403) might
> choose, [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#11753754416015771229) left,
> and went for those that he said he wanted present, and would return
> soon with them,--- Thinks he heard all the convesatin.---
> hea\[r\]d nothing about Gen Smith, making any offers
> to [Foster](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#18425825321779568555) to settle---
> was prsent all the time.------...

Then Jo gets back to the main issue at hand here, the Nauvoo Expositor
itself.

> Mayor--- said the conduct of such men--- & such papers are calculated
> to ~~\<​do​\>~~ destroy the peace of
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#11704955650657133830).---
> and it is not safe that such things should exist--- on acount of
> the mob spirit, which thy tend to produce,--- and--- he had made the
> statemnts he had, and called the witnesses to prepare the council to
> act in the case.---...
>
> \<​Mayor​\> Referred to a writing from [D^r^ \[William\]
> Go-forth](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12886347023563573761),--- ~~and~~ Shewing
> that the Laws presented the communicati\[o\]n from the female
> Relief Society in the \<​Nauvoo​\>
> Neighbr--- ~~was~~ \<​to [D^r^ Goforth](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10774208027333840466)​\>
> as the bone of contintion--- \<​& s\[a\]id​\> If God ever spoke by any
> man, it will not be 5 years
> before this [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#4580667947801118302) in
> ashes and we in our g\[r\]ave unless we go
> to [Oregen](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#11255000207156604835) \<​[california](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#4862110236895234037)​\>
> or some \<​other​\> place,--- if
> the [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#13557906489150788300) does
> not put down. evry thing whic\[h\] tends to mobacracy--- and put down
> their murders, Bogus Makers and scoundrels---, All the sorrow ~~I
> have~~ \<​he had​\> ever had in ~~my~~ \<​his​\> family, has arisin
> though the influnce
> of [W^[m]{.ul}^ Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#2119087507052691017).

Mobocracy was a powerful buzzword in Nauvoo because it invoked all the
trauma of the Missouri experience coming out of the Missouri Mormon war
in 1838. It tied the distinct movements together as the enemies of the
church. Whether mobocrats of Missouri or mobocrats in Nauvoo, they're
all the same because they oppose the kingdom of god. Never mind they
have separate grievances with the church and Joseph Smith which were all
purely reactionary to Joseph and his decisions. Ignore the fact that all
these people were merely trying to make Jo abide by the system of laws
we all agree to abide by. Ignore that Joseph Smith was the actual tyrant
here because they're all mobocrats. Next, Hyrum takes the stand to
solidify this point and draw a line of similarity between the publishers
of the Expositor and the Missouri militia who drove the Mormons out of
the state.

> C. [H.
> Smith](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#15802648472999856428) spoke.---
> in relation to \<​th\[e\]​\> Laws, Fosters, Higbes, [~~[sharpe
> \[Thomas
> Sharp\]]{.ul}~~](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#16078253677264448466) Editor
> of the Signal &c--- and of the impotane \[importance\] of suppressing
> that spirit which has drivn us
> from [Mo.](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1990541461496096361) &c
> That he would go in~~to~~ for an effective ordinance---
>
> Mayor said at the time [Gov \[Thomas\]
> Carlin](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#14531298623720809747) was
> pusing \[pursuing\] ~~me~~ \<​him​\> \<​with his
> writs​\>,--- [W^[m]{.ul}.^ Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#12925657989778441692) came
> to my house with a band of Missou\[r\]ians for the purpose
> of ~~detroying~~ \<​betraying​\> me,--- came to my gate,--- and
> was preve\[n\]ted ~~with~~ by Daniel Carns \[Carn\] who was set to
> watch [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10470574991219385653) comee
> within ~~my~~ \<​his​\> gate, and calld Mayor, ~~Alar~~--- and the
> Mayor
> rep\[r\]oved [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#8858266613604745290) for
> comi\[n\]g at that time of night
>
> Daniel Cairns Swors \[sworn\] ~~them~~ \<​Said​\> abut 10 o'ck \<​at
> night​\>--- a boat came up the river, \<​with about a Doz---
> men​\> [W^[m]{.ul}^ Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3580919439853135424) came
> to the gate with them. \<​Witness​\> was on guard--- and stopped
> them,--- [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1331081997135006004) called
> Joseph to the door--- and wanted an interviw, Joseph said [Bro.
> Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#13785157524091107845) you
> know better than to come here at this hour of the night---
> & [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#7799691395927388879) retur\[ne\]d.---
>
> next
> Morning [Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#6781948109845008226) wrote
> a letter to apologize.--- which he heard read--- which was writtn
> apparently to screen himself from the censure of a conspiracy .--- and
> the Letter betrayed a conspi\[r\]acy on the face of------

This was a horrific misrepresentation of the facts. Daniel Carn had been
an ally of William Law back in February when he told William Law that Jo
had devised a plan to assassinate William. William Law was brought up to
testify about this and refused to give up the name of the Nauvoo police
officer who tipped him off. We talked about this back on the episode
where Jo said there was a Brutus or a Judas in the leadership, that's
episode 178. Now, however, Daniel Carn was smart enough to see the
writing on the wall and realized that doing anything to anger the
prophet spelled his own doom so he sided with Jo and whatever Jo was
planning and became one of these witnesses who would say whatever they
needed to say to make Jo happy.

> [C.
> Phelp](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3018886279028753338)---
> read an ordinace concerig libels.------
>
> Mayor suggested the propriety of having a preamble to
> said ordinance.--- chairman said he would add [C.
> Taylor](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10801063479318743605) to
> the committee.--- to draft a preamble . . .
>
> C. [P.
> Richards](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#14005136669235795127) suggested
> an additin to the ordince read to prevent attempts to take away our
> charter. &c.--- would \<​go for an effective ordinane​\>
>
> Chairman enstucted \[instructed\] the committe to go all lenghts
> \<​to​\> \<​make a​\> full report on the pr\[e\]amble & ordnace

With that, the City Council meeting was adjourned for the day. They
spent over 5 hours discussing the Nauvoo Expositor, the publishers of
it, and some other affairs in the city. Now, there was a game plan.
Double-Dub Phelps, John Taylor, and brother of White-out Willard
Richards, Phineas Richards, were tasked with drafting up a new ordinance
which would tackle libel and slander in the city. John Taylor would be
responsible for crafting a preamble which would state that the Nauvoo
Charter could never be revoked, as if that ordinance would supersede a
decree by the Governor, which revocation of a city charter did require,
a decree which, if created, would completely moot all the power of every
Nauvoo ordinance passed since the charter was formed in addition to
neutering all the city leadership. I don't quite understand their logic
here but maybe they were just trying to do anything possible to retain
power and this was all the power they had access to.

Alright, so where does this leave us? The Mormon empire was expanding in
its ambitions, connections, and aspirations. The irons were hot for a
Mormon revolution in America. Jo and Hingepin Sidney Rigdon were running
for President and Vice President, and putting all their earnest efforts
behind making that dream a reality. Rigdon had brokered a deal with Jo
that he'd run as VP but only if Jo gave him the office of president
after Jo's 4-year term. I'm sure Rigdon could trust Jo this time. Add
into all of this, the nation's collective eye was turned toward Joseph
Smith and the Mormon empire. Politicians across the nation were
incorporating the Mormons into their own political calculus. Now that
all these irons were getting hot enough to strike, the Expositor comes
along and douses the flames... or turns up the heat and overcooks the
irons, is probably a better way of belaboring this analogy. This new
threat needed to be answered and next week we'll be discussing exactly
how the decision was made, how Jo tried to scrub any responsibility from
his hands, and the ultimate fate of the Expositor. These are trying
times filled with controversy, corruption, and conspiracy. Wolves dwell
among the sheep and at least some misdeeds go punished.
