---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 193 – King Follett pt. 1 The Man'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-193-king-follett-pt-1-man/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-193-king-follett-pt-1-the-man
category: History
date: 2020-02-07 04:00:00 +0000
---

King Follett biography

Ep 193 -- King Follett pt. 1 The Man

On this episode, we begin our series about King Follett and the
discourse named after him. Who is he? What discourse did he write? Why
does every Mormon know the name but not the guy? Very little
documentation of his life survives to this day, however, fragmentary
evidence has been pieced together to form a biography of King Follett
which follows him through the life and times of the Follett family in
the early Mormon church under Joseph Smith's leadership. This series
will discuss the man behind the discourse and the theological treatise
given at his funeral known as "The King Follett Discourse". Part one
examines the lives of the Folletts from birth, to joining the church, to
their life in Missouri, ending with King Follett locked in a Missouri
jail while his family made the trip to Quincy, Illinois through the
winter of 1838-39.

Links:

The Man Behind the Discourse: The Biography of King Follett by Joann
Follett Mortensen\
<https://gregkofford.com/products/the-man-behind-the-discourse>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Merch Store <https://groundgnomes.launchcart.store/shop>\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

Few who know anything about Mormonism haven't heard of or read the King
Follett discourse. What is it? What does it mean? Is it King Fawllet or
King Fowlett?

To put it simply, the King Follett discourse was one of Jo's final
sermons before his death. It marked the culmination of many aspects of
his 14-year evolving theology. Aspects of Mormon-Christian theology that
are uniquely Mormon are found only within the King Follett discourse
when absent from Jo's revelations and scriptures. God once being a
human, infants on thrones, philosophies of men mingled with scripture,
and plenty more deeper levels of Mormon theology are present only in
this discourse.

If you've listened to this show before, you know I like to take my sweet
time with big issues in Mormon history. Who would've thought that John
C. Wreck-it Bennett could turn into a 10-part series, or that Mark
Hofmann needed over 8 hours of airtime to begin to scratch the surface?
We've done nearly 13 and a half hours on just the topic of psychedelics
in early Mormonism. So, yeah, I like to take my time on stuff because
understanding the history living at the bedrock upon which the
correlated believing narrative and the so-called anti-Mormon popular
history are built takes time and diligence to exhume.

We're going to take our time with King Follett, the man and the
discourse. Surprisingly, there is a biography of King Follett, which
will serve as the basis of today's episode. While the discourse itself
is only related to King Follett himself tangentially, I think it's good
to give him some air time because he's one of the lesser-known Mormon
elites who didn't live to emigrate to the Salt Lake City basin and help
build the kingdom there. Then, next week, and probably the week after,
we'll go through the discourse from top to bottom. Marie and I read
through it on My Book of Mormon, but I didn't do much prior research to
draw thematic parallels of theology. So that's what we're doing in this
series. We'll get into possible source materials for some of Jo's very
late theology, what's unique, what's derivative from other theology, and
from where in his earlier theology the 1844 King Follett discourse
theology evolved.

Let's get started.

King Follett was born on July 1788 in Winchester, New Hampshire the son
of Hannah Alexander Follett, who was the second wife of John Follett.
Both of King's parents were descendants of Salem Massachusetts European
immigrants and John Follett fought in the revolutionary war. Although
John Follett never received the formal designation of Captain, his
headstone and some documents about him list him as Captain Follett. King
grew up in a family of 14 kids from 2 mothers. The family was
comfortable from John's industry. When John died, his probate file was
judged to be over \$1,500, which was quite substantial in 1829 money.
There are also a bunch of land deed records revealing John Follett was
quite into land speculation and making a quick buck from it. However,
the probate judge determined that his assets couldn't outweigh his
liabilities which leads one to believe that the Follett family lived
comfortably, even if some of that comfort was only possible through
lines of credit. King Follett grew up with his 13 siblings in Winchester
New Hampshire.

From the biography of King Follett, written by a descendant, Joann
Follett Mortensen titled The Man Behind the Discourse:

> King and his brothers learned early to work on the family farm and
> help provide the necessities of life. Every family grew grains and
> vegetables for home use and to feed livestock. Berries grew wild and
> most families kept an apple orchard, using the fruit for food and for
> liquor, which was consumed or sold. The young men of each family spent
> long hours each day tending crops and animals, for it required
> everyone's labor to meet daily needs.
>
> Clothes were entirely made at home from flax grown on the property and
> wool sheared from the family sheep. These items were usually left to
> the natural color or dyed in dark colors like browns, blacks, greens,
> and blues. Perhaps once a year the average farmer would go to Boston
> or another large market town where he would trade surplus from the
> family farm for items that could not be raised, grown, or produced at
> home.

Eventually, King met his wife to be, Louisa Tanner, who was ten years
his junior and also from 17^th^-century immigrant stock. Her father also
served in the Revolutionary War. The Follett family were Universalists
while the Tanners were Presbyterians.

Let me quickly voice an issue when it comes to lesser-known Mormon
elites. We've discussed this before but it bears quick mention when we
talk about King and Louisa Follett. Very little documentation actually
survives about them and almost nothing from them. They didn't keep
journals. Letter correspondences in their hands have best lost to
history as neither of them were important enough to have scribes to copy
every letter and save every scrap. Joann Follett Mortensen, who wrote
King Follett's biography, relies almost solely on a scant few official
church publications and mentions in other people's journals for any
information on King, Louisa, or their 9 children. This is a common
restriction historians run into when writing biographies or even
genealogies of people who just weren't that notable with respect to the
larger movement of which they were a part.

King purchased a lot in St. Lawrence county, New York in 1811 where he
and Louisa met and were married in 1815. He was 27, she 16 or 17, not
uncommon age pairings for the day. Upon his move to St. Lawrence county,
New York, King Follett became interested in politics and town affairs.
He attended town meetings and became the overseer of the highway system
in the county. His job was basically to decide when and where a road
might be built as well as maintaining the current roads in his assigned
area. King also opened up a liquor store and ran it for a while,
although the annual license wasn't renewed so there's no evidence he
continued to sell alcohol beyond his purchasing the license in 1813.
King also served jury duty and a few other affairs necessary of any good
citizen of early frontier America.

Sometime in 1818 or 1819, King and Louisa Follett moved to Portage
County, Ohio to a little town called Shalersville, roughly 33 miles from
Mentor, Ohio. Mentor, Ohio is the town to which Hingepin Sidney Rigdon
moved and began making a name for himself as a preacher in the early
1820s. At this time, the Folletts were members of the Methodist
Episcopal church in the little frontier town. There was a bit of
selection bias for this label as it was the only church in the area; but
such was very common for early American settlers who didn't have cars to
travel tens of miles every Sunday to attend their preferred
denomination. They lived with King's brother, Alexander who died in 1826
at the age of 33 and a member of the local Masonic Lodge, leading me to
believe that King was also inducted into the society while here in
Portage County or possibly during his days in Lawrence County, New York.

King's father, John Follett IV, died in August of 1829 at the age of 77
when King was 41 years old. King's mother, Hannah, would spend the
remaining 9 years of her life likely living with her children. King was
probably still selling strong apple cider and running his small farm
while his wife, Louisa, continued to have more children. This was the
era of roaming preachers in an area experiencing radiant heat from the
Burned-over district. Joann Follett Mortensen reprints an anonymous
history of the area where it discusses these roaming preachers at the
end of chapter 3 of her excellent biography of King Follett.

> The settlers had to depend upon the stray crumbs that fell from the
> table of the Lord for their spiritual sustenance. Occasionally some
> hardy old Methodist circuit rider, or some missionary of the
> Connecticut Society of Home Missions would come along, but their
> visits were very infrequent, yet when they did come the occasion was
> one of great joy and satisfaction. The preacher was well taken care
> of, and if it was a Sabbath when he preached, the entire township
> would turn out to hear the word. Denomination, sect and particular
> belief were all dropped; immersion and sparkling were not thought of,
> and the rigid Predestinarian and the absolute Free-Willer clasped
> hands round the Altar of the Lord, beneath the overarching branches of
> some grand old oak, or at the humble cabin of the pioneer.

This is the time and place where Hingepin Sidney Rigdon was gaining
social prominence as one of these roaming preachers. They would have
their home base where they lived and would preach the majority of the
year, but then would travel for weeks at a time and preach in churches
of different congregations or even just in some person's house.
Preachers in the late 1700s and early 1800s were rock stars and people
came from all over to attend their sermons. Why? Because Catholicism and
the Anglican Church didn't have much power in America. These were people
who had recently emigrated from Europe or were the immediate descendants
of folks who'd emigrated where religious freedom was a new liberty ripe
for experimentation. Throwing off Britain again during the War of 1812
brought those freedoms to the front of everybody's mind again and the
occupation of preacher experienced a renewed invigoration in the
American jobs market. The Folletts and anybody in small towns became
subject to, and interested in, this new marketplace of religious ideas.
So did Joseph Smith. While Sidney Rigdon was in his late 20s and early
30s making a name for himself, Joseph Smith was in his teens and early
20s experimenting with religion. Similarly, the Folletts were seekers,
although on the consumption side of the equation, not the production
side like Rigdon and Jo.

Unfortunately for the historical record and those of us who consume it
piecemeal today, there really isn't much available about when and why
King and Louisa Follett joined the church. The only available record
simply states that King was ordained an elder in 1831, then the
highest-ranking position available in the church. Understandably, the
Follett family likely adhered to Rigdon's theology which has many
similarities to Mormonism in regards to communalism, universal
salvation, and a few other points. They lived close enough to many of
Rigdon's parishioners through the late 1820s. Once P-cubed Parley Parker
Pratt joined the church and returned to Kirtland with a Book of Mormon,
thereby convincing Hingepin Rigdon to convert, over 100 Rigdonites
joined Mormonism in a month at the end of 1830. Rigdon returned from his
trip to meet Jo and the Smith family and Jo tagged along, calling
Kirtland, Ohio his new home. It was likely around this time in early to
mid-1831 that King and Louisa Follett were caught up in the baptism fire
that burned through many of Rigdon's loosely confederated congregations.

The next autumn of 1831, Jo and Emma moved to the John Johnson farm in
Hiram, Ohio, just a short 9 miles from the Follett home. During this
period, King and Louisa would have had an opportunity to hear Jo speak
in person during Sunday discourses, sharing the pulpit with the
Follett's well-known preacher Hingepin Rigdon.

Here, King Follett first makes his appearance by name in a journal of
Mormon leadership; that of Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. Hyrum, just like
Jo, resolved to keep a journal in the year of 1832. And, just like his
younger brother, Hyrum only kept it for a little while and then just
kind of forgot to keep up the way I and I'm sure many of you keep your
journals. Well, for a brief moment, we see in Hyrum Smith's journal 3
separate mentions of a brother folet. Luckily for us, Hyrum Smith was a
terrible writer in 1832 and he wrote many things phonetically, including
the name of King Follett, which leads me to believe it's Fowlett, not
Fawllet. Hyrum's interactions with King Follett are rather fascinating
in that they reveal something we've never discussed on the show, at
least as far as I can recall. Books of Mormon were traded as a
commodity. King Follett purchased Books of Mormon from Hyrum
Sidekick-Abiff Smith and gave him sheep in exchange.

From Joann Follett Mortensen's book chapter 4

> March Sold 5 Books to Brother folet of Shulersvill and left 2 more at
> his hose for to Be Sold.
>
> June th 2D went to Parkmen with Brother Parley Pratt and preached the
> 3D and Baptised three and Confirmed them from there to the town of
> Hiram and from thence to the town of Mulersveil and Buayt 19 Sheep Of
> Brother follet and paid Eght Books which is 10\$ and paid 10\$
> Towoward the Cows that I bought of Him."
>
> June the 27 finished paing for the Sheep and Cow herd of Brother
> follet.
>
> The fact that King traded sheep for copies of the Book of Mormon and
> purchased other copies suggests that he was also engaged in missionary
> activities.

Yes indeed, Books of Mormon were used as a commodity when the Smith
family and the small church in New York was having trouble selling them.
What this does illustrate is that King and Louisa Follett were fully in
and had fully hitched their wagons to the misadventures and wiles of the
prophet of Mormonism. Although records are really squishy concerning
their whereabouts, the Folletts moved with their young family of 5 by
1832 to Jackson County, Missouri, the location Jo had declared as Zion
when he visited in July 1831 and dedicated the temple lot. According to
Joann Follett Mortensen, no county, city, or state records exist of the
Folletts purchasing property in Jackson County. So, either they didn't
have the means to acquire land of their own and simply lived with
another family, or they did purchase land and the deed has long since
been lost to history.

In Missouri, the Folletts enjoyed all the delights of consecrating all
their property to the bishop's storehouse, administrated by Algernon
Sidney Gilbert, who would become a casualty of the ill-fated Zion's Camp
in 1834. This was the communalistic effort the church made under Jo's
leadership requiring all members to transfer all their property to the
church to create a community pool that people could then withdraw items
from the pool according to their need. The system quickly collapsed but
it didn't stop people like the Folletts from giving everything they
owned to the church and ending up losing everything they owned because
of it just like thousands of Mormons did throughout Jo's life.

King and Louisa Follett also attended church under the presidency of
D-Day David Whitmer. David Whitmer, John Goebbels Whitmer, and William
Wines Double-Dub Phelps comprised the presidency of the Missouri stake
of the church which was repeatedly subdivided as more Mormons immigrated
to Missouri throughout the early to mid 1830s.

The Folletts were in Missouri to experience the initial uprising of
tensions between the Mormons and Missourians. We've talked about it to
death on the show but it's a crucial issue that much of Jo's life
centers around. The Missourians hated the Mormons for some legitimate
and plenty of illegitimate reasons. It all came to a head when
Double-Dub Phelps started printing Jo's revelations talking about a
Native American uprising and the Mormons consecrating the property of
the non-Mormons to the bishop's storehouse. When the Missourians found
out about the revelations it broke the camel's back and they burned down
the printing press and called out the local militias. The Mormons formed
their own militia to combat the Missourians which resulted in a small
battle known as the Battle of the Big Blue. King Follett likely
participated in this fight as one of the settlements that was directly
impacted was the one where the Follett family lived.

From his biography:

> The Missourians, in addition to threatening Christian Whitmer
> physically, began to destroy his home located on the east end of town.
> David Whitmer led his \[militia\] group, including King Follett, from
> the west toward Christian's home. A group from the Colesville Branch
> under Caleb Baldwin's leadership, advanced on the mob from the south
> armed with pitchforks. Someone in the mob yelled, "Give them hell,"
> and fired. Whitmer's men returned fire. Two of the Missourians were
> killed and at least one was wounded. One Church member, Andrew Barber
> died, and at least four men were wounded. The members of the mob fled,
> pursued for a short distance by the Saints. These events apparently
> reached their climax in the evening.

As a result of this aggression, the citizens of Independence, Jackson
County, Missouri formed a coalition and signed a resolution to force the
Mormons out of Jackson County. With the help of Governor Daniel Dunklin,
the Mormons were removed from the county through the end of 1833 and
into the spring of 1834. Governor Dunklin apportioned a reserve of land
in Clay County, just north of Jackson, for the Mormon resettlement. The
Mormons resettled there and in the adjacent Caldwell County. Daviess
County would be formed in 1836 as another Mormon county.

The loss felt by the Follett family during this first exodus was quite
immense. While her husband languished in a Missouri jail in 1839, Louisa
King signed an affidavit valuing her family's loss of property of \$170
for land, improvements on the land, and lost crops. This, of course, was
created in the wake of the Missouri-Mormon war of 1838 when the Mormons
were forced completely from the state of Missouri.

During the interim period of 1834 to 8, the Follett family largely
remained in the Mormon Missouri counties. Just like almost every
Missouri Mormon, the result of this first exodus from Jackson County
left them largely destitute. The family wealth they'd built up for 2
decades of their marriage, King and Louisa found themselves in the
throes of poverty thanks to their association with the new fanatical
American religion. Once again from the biography:

> Those Saints who fled... found themselves in very nearly the same
> miserable condition. Some lacking bedding took shelter in caves from
> the rain and bitter winds. David Pettegrew recalled, not only the
> suffering of his own family, but also "the privations and sufferings
> of the Saints. They suffered not only from anguish of heart at the
> loss of home, property, stock and provisions... \[but also because\]
> no comfort, no relief, could be procured for them constantly exposed
> to the inclemency of the weather... These were the beginning of days
> of great trial to us."

It sucked for these people. The worst part of it all was this was only
really the beginning of their suffering in Missouri. The Follett family
suffered along with the over 1,000 Mormons who were driven from Jackson
county in 1833 to 34 beginning in November and seeing completion by
April. On a brief somber note, the Folletts made this exodus with little
baby Alexander in Loiusa's arms for the journey. The Follett's had
experienced the deaths of 3 children prior to their move from Ohio to
Missouri and the young family was slowly growing even amidst all of
these trials.

What the Folletts did or where they went specifically is a matter of
historical mystery as so little about the family has survived. They were
most likely among the large contingent of Mormons who believed they
would be able to return to their land in Jackson County at some point.
Jo had given the Missouri Mormons a revelation that they shouldn't sell
their lands in Zion because it was such an important site for the
church. That directive only ensured deep and unending poverty for the
Mormons settling in Clay and Caldwell counties as they would have
absolutely no means to purchase lands. The majority of Missouri land was
owned by the government due to the Indian Removal Act so people could
just go to a chunk of land and put in crops and a build a cabin and the
government would give them a deed. However, because so many Mormons
thought they'd eventually be granted passage back into Jackson County
where they could continue to live on the land they'd done that with over
the previous 4 years, many Mormons didn't make earnest efforts to build
another cabin and put in more crops, which only exacerbated the
starvation and general destitution of the population.

The only answer for these outrages, in Jo's eyes anyway, was a military
campaign. He formed a militia of over 200 men, calling for 2,000 men, to
march from Ohio to Missouri and reinstate the Mormons on their Jackson
County land. This was the ill-fated Zion's Camp as it actually didn't
involve any true military action with the exception of a drill skirmish
among the camp itself which resulted in a guy getting shot in the hand.
Zion's Camp departed in May of 1834 with a loose plan of what exactly
they would do. Messengers and eager enquirers approached the camp
multiple times asking who they were and what they were doing, only to be
given non-answers by the Mormon militia. Even so, the pressure of Zion's
Camp bearing down on the Missouri non-Mormons caused an extreme amount
of trouble for the Mormons and Missourians alike.

The reasons Jo organized this militia force were to essentially escort
the Mormons forced from Jackson County back to their homes and provide
protection once the reinstatement had been completed. It was a
spectacular failure resulting in "more smoke than fire" and a cholera
outbreak which afflicted 68 and killed 14 among the camp. Also, the lead
negotiator for getting the Mormons money for their Jackson County
property, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, contracted it and died, severely
reducing the bargaining power and negotiation rapport the Mormons had
built up over the previous 7 months. His death made it so instead of the
Jackson county Missourians paying double the market value for the
Mormon's property, they paid nothing. Zion's Camp returned to Ohio
empty-handed and with fewer men than they left with. Beyond that, the
majority of the Camp didn't actually return. Jo and his closest advisors
returned to Ohio, but the camp had drained their resources completely
dry on the journey out there and over a hundred of the men just stuck
around in Missouri, only further exacerbating the starvation and
destitution problems. King and Louisa Follett were among these Missouri
Mormons who suffered greatly as a result of these repeated debacles by
the Mormon leadership.

After Zion's camp, a little policing was necessary in the various Mormon
branches in Missouri. As background, when the church was operating in
Kirtland, Ohio under Jo's leadership, the Missouri church operated as
essentially a separate church under the Whitmers and Phelps. Letters
took weeks to transmit between the two centers of leadership and
obviously a fair number of disagreements arose about the best way to run
the church. These disagreements eventually came to a head when Jo fled
the Kirtland church in early 1838 and excommunicated the Whitmers,
Cowdery, and Phelps and gave them 3 days to leave town or get a visit
from the Danites. Those disagreements were just beginning to manifest in
1834 and 35 and to bring the congregations into conformity with the
Kirtland leadership, various disciplinary councils were held for members
practicing Mormonism in unapproved ways. For a snapshot of this, I'm
going to read a pretty sizeable portion from the King Follett biography
and we'll discuss it afterwards. As a preface, David Whitmer called a
disciplinary council for the Hulet Branch of the church in Missouri, the
branch the Folletts attended. The guy leading the branch was apparently
engaging in the usage of "gifts" in unapproved ways which led to his
giving prophecies and a woman named Sally Crandall interpreting his
prophetic tongues. Sally's prophecies are absolutely fascinating to me.
Additionally, the person who administered the ordination and gifts in
the unapproved manner had their elder's license taken away while
retaining their membership. The early church operates very differently
from the church today. The verdict came from D-Day David Whitmer that
their usage of gifts was of the devil. Bear with me as we get through
this council concerning members of the branch the Folletts attended.

> By July of 1834 problems involving doctrine and procedure in the Hulet
> Branch were brought to the attention of the newly formed high council
> of the Clay County Stake... King Follett and Nathan West both appear
> prominently in the only record of these events---the minutes of high
> council meetings beginning on July 31 and continuing on August 1 and
> 6. On July 31, the first charge made by Nathan West \[was\] read by
> John Whitmer:
>
> Know ye that, where as, Br. \[Samuel\] Brown an high priest of this
> Church of Christ did on the last week come into this Branch \[the
> Colesville branch\] and taught certain of the brethren & sisters
> things much the reverse of what we had by encouraging them in
> practising gifts.
>
> And where as said Brown did in an underhanded, (and as we conceive)
> clandestine manner ordain Sylvester Hulett to the office of high
> priest; insisting that he had obtained a witness from the Lord for the
> same, which witness he said was the promise of performing the
> ordination on receiving the gift of tongues; which gift he said he had
> never received before but afterwards said he had been in possession of
> the same gift for the space of a year.
>
> And whereas, said Brown seemed to undervalue the authority or at least
> the righteousness of the high Council by charging me not to say any
> thing that would tend to prejudice their minds that they might not
> judge righteously.
>
> I therefore, as an Elder of the Church of Christ, do earnestly solicit
> the attention of the council in considering the same.
>
> Testimony was given on July 31 and on August 1 by Leonard Rich,
> Charles Rich,... \[etc.\]. Each testified that they had either had
> conversation with Brown about the events outlined in the charges or
> had overheard others speak about them, and that Brown had asked them
> not to say anything about it. Sylvester Hulet confirmed that the
> ordination had taken place, although he had told Brown that he
> \[Hulet\] "had made application to the Council for an ordination some
> time since and was rejected." Hulet further testified that Brown
> "seemed to talk to me in such a manner that understood him to sensure
> the heads of this Church in some things."
>
> The "charges were sustained by the testimony" and President David
> Whitmer announced the decision and told Brown "therefore, if you
> confess all the charges which have been alleged against you to be
> just, and in a spirit that we can receive it, then you can stand as a
> private member in this Church, otherwise we have no fellowship for
> you; and also, that the ordination of Sylvester Hulet, by Samuel
> Brown, is illegal and not acknowledged by us to be of God, and
> therefore it is void." Based on the decision "Brother Brown confessed
> the charges and gave up his license, but retained his membership."
> Though King \[Follett\] is not mentioned as being present at these
> proceedings, ti is logical he might have been (if the high council
> meeting was open to anyone other than those who testified) because of
> his involvement in the continuing issue of the Hulet Settlement
> regarding the practicing of gifts, a charge that was considered at the
> next meeting of the high council.
>
> On August 6, the council met again and Nathan West brought another
> charge, this time against the entire Hulet Branch,... stating that
> branch members had "imbibed certain principles concerning the gifts
> that are thought not to be correct by the greater part of the rest of
> the Church, which principles seem to have a tendency to cause a split
> and disunion in the church." This was technically a charge against his
> in-laws, the Folletts, as they were members of that branch. Charles
> English gave testimony and explained that branch members would not
> "proceed to their temporal business without receiving the word of the
> Lord" and that "they would not receive the teachings of ordained
> members even br. Joseph Smith jr. unless it agreed with their gifts."
> Typically, this "word" came through the gift of tongues with Sylvester
> Hulet speaking and Sally Crandall interpreting. English stated that
> the branch members believed that they "had come up to their privileges
> more than the rest of the Church. They thought they were right but if
> they could be convined that they were wrong, they would retract."
> Sally Crandall was the wife of Daniel Crandall. The family had moved
> to Jackson County in 1832 and resided in the Prairie Branch near the
> Hulets. Daniel's wife, (Sally), was though by some to be a "visionary
> woman."
>
> As one example, Sally Crandall claimed that she could "know and see
> men's hearts." According to Philo Dibble, a member of Hulet Branch,
> she had seen "the heart of King Follet that it was not right" while
> Nathan West contributed the mystifying statement that "Sally Crandle
> saw his heart and that it was full of eyes, also saw eyes in other
> hearts some had few and some many." After further testimony, David
> Whitmer ruled that "as for the Hulet branch the devil decieved them
> and that they obtained not the word of the Lord as they supposed they
> did, but were deceived; and as for the gift of seeing as held by the
> Hulet branch, it is of the devil saith the Lord God."

Y'all know from my research how I interpret this. I think the gifts and
ordinations they practiced were very much physical objects causing
people like Sally Crandall and Sylvester Hulet to have incredibly
visions and prophecies. Their usage of these gifts required reining in
by the president of the Zion stake, David Whitmer, who denounced it as
them being deceived by the devil. What does it mean when Sally said she
could see men's hearts and they were full of eyes? I find all of this
particularly remarkable because all of this makes sense within the
context of psychedelics in early Mormonism and notably, Joseph Smith was
not here to keep the gifts under his control. He was running the church
in Kirtland at this time preparing for the Kirtland Temple dedication. I
believe it is reasonable to interpret this as members of the Hulet
branch searching mysteries and seeking prophecy and the gift of
spiritual sight without top-down direction, which has the ability to
inspire division and insurrection, thus, David Whitmer had to bring the
practice to an end. King Follett may have attended this council and
witnessed the disciplinary actions first-hand. He remained a member with
his entire family.

A short time after this council, King Follett made his journey to
Kirtland, Ohio. It was a journey of over 1,000 miles, most likely purely
on foot. The reason he made the journey? It was time for the Kirtland
Temple to be dedicated. His name even merited mention in the official
History of the Church entry for November 4, 1835 where it simply states
"King Follet arrived today from Zion." This was an ecstatic time for the
Kirtland church as the finishing touches were being placed on the
temple. It wasn't simply the dedication ceremony where visions and
endowments occurred; for months prior to the March dedication, crazy
stuff happened all over Kirtland, particularly at prayer feasts. King
Follett attended one of these and his name was recorded in the journal
of William Wines Double-Dub Phelps for December 16, 1835, which I'm
reading from the Follett biography.

> I attended a feast at the house of Bro. Zera S. Coles; about sixty
> guests were present, a number of whom were blessed by Father Joseph
> Smith, among them being Elijah Fordham, King Follett and Jesse
> Hitchcock. This was the first and greatest blessing feast I have ever
> attended. The greatest solemnity and harmony prevailed. The vituals
> were good and the affair was orderly and enjoyable, though many of
> those present were young.

During the very next month, King Follett finally received his very own
anointing.

> A week later on January 28, the elders, presumably including King, met
> to "receive their anointing." Joseph moved from group to group, at one
> point going "to the quorum of Elders in the other endo f the room"
> where he "assisted in anointing the conselors of the president of the
> Elders and gave them the instruction necessary for the occasion and
> left the President and his councilors to anoint the Elders, while I
> should go to the adjoining room." After the quorum presidency was
> anointed, "President \[Alvah\] Beaman anointed twenty four Elders...
> and the Lord poured out his spirit, and some spake with tongues and
> prophesied. Oh the wonderous blessings of the God of Israel." King
> Follett was one of the twenty-four elders anointed that day."

As an immediate result of this new anointing, King Follett was inducted
into the second quorum of Seventy and notice of this was published in
the Kirtland-based Messenger and Advocate in July of 1836. From that
time forward, King Follett was officially a recognized General Authority
of the Mormon church under Jo's leadership.

After the Kirtland Temple dedication ceremony in March of that year,
instead of heading home to Missouri, King Follett made an unexpected
visit to New York, most likely to settle business related to the recent
death of his mother-in-law. He returned to Kirtland soon after and was
given the task of taking a wagon of supplies to the Whitmers in
Missouri. He arrived there sometime probably in May or June of 1836.

Upon his arrival, the constant tension between the Missourian
non-Mormons and the Mormon settlers in the state was continuing to grow.
Eventually the Missouri citizens gathered with the support of Daniel
Dunklin and signed a petition to form a new county to be the Mormon
county. Where the Mormons had initially settled after being removed from
Jackson County was to Caldwell and Clay counties. However, those
counties had old citizens there and the Mormons made terrible neighbors.
This new petition formed Daviess County and established an area near
Shoal creek as the county seat, which would eventually be termed
Adam-Ondi-Ahmen. The Follett family, in accordance with the
Missouri-citizen petition and at the direction of the Missouri Stake
leadership, D-Day David Whitmer, moved to the newest Caldwell County
settlement that would become the new Missouri headquarters of the
church, Far West.

Tensions in Kirtland boiled over as a result of the Fanny Alger scandal,
the collapse of the KSS anti-Bank, and the defection of Martin Harris,
among many other issues. Joseph Smith was removed from the Kirtland
stake of the church as the leader. He, Sidney Rigdon, and the majority
of the Quorum of Apostles were forced to flee under the cover of night,
arriving in Far West, Missouri in February of 1838. King Follett was one
of the landowners who purchased land from the government in the newly
formed Daviess County in February of 1837. After losing money to the law
of consecration, giving nearly every spare penny to the church as
tithing, and being removed from his home 3 times because of his
attachment to the church, King Follett was finally, once again, a
landowner. Things were beginning to look up. Beyond that, the prophet
had chosen to relocate the church headquarters to the city where Follett
owned his land, making it prime real estate for the coming influx of
members caught up in the exodus from Kirtland to Missouri.

It wasn't a situation which would last long. The tensions building with
Missouri over the previous 5 years rose to a boiling point. Joseph Smith
also excommunicated the Missouri Stake leadership of the Whitmers,
Phelps, and Oliver Cowdery, the leadership the Follett family had been
following for those 5 years. During the excommunication, King Follett
voiced his support for David Whitmer to remain in the Missouri
leadership, but his support fell on the deaf ears of the newly sustained
presidency, Jo, Rigdon and Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith. The Folletts
decided to remain with their wagon hitched to the Far West Mormon
movement, come hell or high water.

Hell came. The Missouri-Mormon war caused a galvanization of the Mormons
and vilification of their Missouri citizen aggressors, as the Mormons
saw it anyway. Due to now being elevated to the presidency of the second
Quorum of Seventy, King Follett was likely a member of the Mormon
militia. The 1838 Mormon militia is kind of a tough issue to work with.
Jo had organized the Danites as the secret underground enforcement squad
and the Army of Israel as the public militia. Although historians have
drawn lines between these two organizations today, it's pretty hard to
actually see those distinctions from the scant extant records. A
reasonable assumption is that the majority of the Danites were also
soldiers in the Army of Israel but not every soldier in the Army was a
member of the Danites. However, just about any church leader ranking as
high as King Follett did being in the presidency of the third-highest
ranking leadership body, it's no stretch to believe he was a Danite as
well as an officer or captain over a division of the Army of Israel. He
was also 51 at this time so his age would carry with it a certain degree
of wisdom and authority these militias needed to feel and look
legitimate. However, no surviving record explicitly states that King
Follett was actually a member of either or both of these militia units.

Where the Follett family figures into the Missouri-Mormon conflict is
hard to nail down. One thing is certain. One of the primary catalysts
which set off the Missouri-Mormon war of 1838 was the Gallatin election
day fight between Missourians and Mormons. Go back to Episode 44 of the
show for a refresher of what happened then. Suffice it to say, the
Missourians didn't want the Mormons to vote, and the Mormons weren't
happy about it. One of the leading men during that brawl was John L.
Butler.

From Stephen Lesueur's excellent historiography of the Missouri-Mormon
War:

> "You are a damned liar. Joseph Smith is a damned imposter," Weldon
> \[said\].
>
> Weldon then began striking Brown \[a Mormon\]. When other Mormons
> attempted to restrain Weldon, fiver or six Missourians jumped into the
> fray. John L. Butler, a large and powerful Mormon, rankled at the
> abuse heaped upon his people. "The first thing that came to my mind
> was the covenants entered into by the Danites to the effect that they
> were to protect each other, etc," Butler recalled, "and I hollowed out
> to the top of my voice saying 'O yes, you Danites, here is a job for
> us.'" When Butler gave the Danite signal of distress, about ten more
> Latter-day Saints ran to the defense of their brethren. Seeing this,
> forty or fifty Missourians stepped in to battle the Mormons.
>
> "I had witnessed many knock-downs in my time, but none on so grand a
> scale," wrote Joseph McGee, a non-Mormon observer of the fight. The
> participants used no guns, but struck at one another with whips,
> clubs, rocks, and knives. The Mormons rallied behind Butler, who
> wielded a large wooden club he found in a nearby pile of wood. "When I
> called out for the Danites a power rested upon me such as one as I
> never felt before," Butler later wrote. "... I never struck a man the
> second time, and while knocking them down, I really felt that they
> would soon embrace the gospel."

John Butler was singled out as the primary Mormon aggressor in this
election-day brawl. The Missourians were immediately on the hunt for him
and Jo called out the Danites for security in response. Back to Joann
Follett Mortensen's biography of King Follett for the Folletts' role in
the immediate aftermath of this fight that lit the powder kegs that
exploded into the Missouri-Mormon War.

> After speaking with John Butler about threats against him personally,
> the Prophet instructed him to "go and move them \[his family\]
> directly and do not sleep another night there." Butler obediently
> "started on to far West and my wife folow'd me the next day. We stopt
> on the west side of far West and went into Follets farm to live." John
> left Far West the next day to join a group of men on their way back to
> Daviess County. Though King \[Follett\] had not been at Gallatin for
> the election, he may have been in the "Mormon possee" or may have gone
> there with John, leaving both the Butler and Follett families at
> King's farm. At the least, King and his family willingly gave shelter
> to the Butler family.

King and Louisa Follett agreed to harbor a fugitive at Jo's direction in
the immediate aftermath of the Gallatin election day brawl. A cold war
of sorts was the inevitable result. What soon followed was the Battle at
Crooked River. This battle happened because the Missouri militia had
taken 3 Mormons prisoner who'd previously robbed a supply train of the
militia which included 45 rifles. As the militia was carrying back the
prisoners toward Richmond to stand trial, the Danites attacked. King
Follett was among them.

Participants in the Battle at Crooked River made their escape after a
few of the Mormons had been slain and a small number of the Captain
Bogart's Missouri troops had been wounded. This escalated tensions and
became the justification for Governor Lilburn Boggs to sign the
Extermination Order, forcing the Mormons out of the state. Far West and
Adam-Ondi-Ahmen, the twin Mormon cities, were put under siege from the
Missouri state militia and General Lucas forced the Mormons to surrender
with his superior force. 4 days after the surrender, King Follett with 3
others who participated in the battle at Crooked River were arrested and
taken to Richmond for the November court of inquiry that resulted in the
internment of the prophet and 5 others in Liberty Jail and dozens of
other Mormon leaders in jails throughout Missouri.

During the November Court of Inquiry, Reed Peck testified that "King
Follet was not in that expedition; but he was Captain of 12 men in Far
West, under the Danite order, as I understand, as he was neither an
officer nor private of militia, and was known and called under the
fictitious name of Captain Bull, and his company was called the
Regulators." Captain Bull of the Regulators has a certain ring to it.
This testimony is the only explicit document that links King Follett to
the Danites and it's merely witness testimony which contradicts other
research that puts King Follett at the battle of Crooked River. What
matters, however, is that this testimony exonerated Follett from
participation and he was released after the November Court of Inquiry,
only to be rearrested in March or April of 1839 as the majority of the
Mormons were making their way through the snow to Quincy, Illinois.

One of those people who immediately fled Missouri for Illinois was
Bishop Edward Party-Boy Partridge, who's since departed our historical
timeline due to his death in May of 1840. As Bishop and a leader of the
Danites, Partridge's life was in danger upon his release because of
vigilante justice. He fled, leaving his family behind in the care of
King Follett. His wife, Lydia, and two daughters, Eliza and Emily, were
cared for by the Folletts. Apparently Eliza Partridge wrote that "King
Follet proved a true friend" and assisted them in every way. The Follett
family farm became a haven for Mormons in Far West preparing for the
journey to Quincy, Illinois. King Follett probably helped with some of
the organization and logistics of this third mass-exodus of the Mormon
population but was again arrested in spring of 1839 and taken to
Richmond to be interred with around 48 other Mormon leaders. The
majority of them were let free, but King Follett was interred with
Morris Phelps and Parley P. Pratt in the Columbia jail.

These men eventually devised an escape plan to be affected during the
town's July 4^th^ celebrations. Each had a job for the escape and the
plan was when the jailer delivered their dinner that evening, they'd
request the inner door be opened so as not to spill the coffee pot by
handing it through the food window. King Follett's job during this
escape was to grab the door out of the jailor's hands and pry it open as
far as he could, when Morris Phelps would attack the jailor and subdue
him, allowing all three to escape. Then they would mount horses that had
been left outside by their coconspirators to allow them to get out of
town as quickly as possible. Joann Follett Mortensen expertly
reconstructs these events from 3 sources, 2 of which were eyewitnesses.

> When the prisoners heard the approaching footsteps, they got in place
> to receive the food with King in front to jerk open the door so that
> Morris could stun the jailer and run downstairs with Parley following
> and King third. As usual, the jailer handed the food through the
> window but yielded to their persuasion to open the door enough to hand
> in the coffeepot without spilling it. Parley's version included
> elaborate allusions to characters from John Bunyon's masterpiece,
> *Pilgrim's Progress*:
>
> No sooner was the key turned than the door was seized by Mr. Follett
> with both hands; and with his foot placed against the wall, he soon
> opened a passage, which was in the same instant filled by Mr. Phelps,
> and followed by myself and Mr. Follett. The old jailer strode across
> the way, and stretched out his arms like Bunyan's Apollion, or like
> the giant Despair in Doubting Castel, but all to no purpose. One or
> two leaps brought us to the bottom of the stairs, carrying the old
> gentleman \[the jailer\] with us headlong, helter skelter, while old
> Luman sat and laughed in his corner of the prison, and Mrs. Phelps
> exclaimed, "O Lord God of Israel, thou canst help." Old Mrs. Gibbs
> looked on in silent amazement, while the jailer's wife acted the part
> of the giants despair's wife, Diffidence, and not only assisted in the
> scuffle, but cried out so loud that the town was soon alarmed.
>
> Laura Phelps, who was watching from the kitchen, heard the jailer call
> out. His wife, who weighed about two hundred pounds, rushed up the
> stairs. Mary Ann Phelps related the exciting sstory she heard from her
> patrents: "The jailer had father clinched, but father jumped down two
> pairs of stairs, six steps each, with the jailer's wife hanging onto
> one of his arms. He would get rid of her when he jumped, but she would
> clinch him again when she again reached him. She could make better
> progress than he because the jailer held on to him, and in that
> condition they got down to the kitchen. Here Parley Pratt and Mr.
> Follet made their escape, and left father in the hands of the jailer."
> This setback was only momentary. Phelps immediately broke loose and
> rushed outside. He, Pratt, and King ran toward the grove where Orson
> and John were waiting with the horses.

The town immediately reacted and gathered around the jail with guns and
pitchforks to attempt a recapture of the men. Morris Phelps and Parley
Pratt made their escape and flew off in different directions to avoid
recapture. However, because King Follett was required to ride Laura
Phelps' horse for his escape, her side saddle proved a hindrance and the
mob caught up to him.

> Laura Phelps waiting at the jail, heard a "shout of triumph" from the
> woods, indicating to her that at least one of them ahd been captured
> by the quickly forming posse. As Parley later wrote, presumably based
> on the details she related, she heard the men laughing and cursing,
> accompanied by the threat: "We've catched one of the damn'd Mormons
> and we'll roast him alive over a slow fire, damn him." At first she
> was told it was her husband \[Morris\] that had been captured and that
> they were going to "kill him on the spot." Soon she recognized that
> the prisoner was Kign Follett "on whom they were venting their rage,
> as if he would be torn to pieces." King was riding sidesaddle on her
> horse, making it impossible for her to pretend that she had not been
> involved in the jailbreak.

They dragged him off the horse, threw him back in the jail, and chained
his feet to the floor and his arms to the stove flu. Laura was chastised
by the jailer but eventually told to leave with some stern words.
According to P-cubed Parley Parker Pratt, after the excitement had
cooled off, they unchained King Follett and allowed him to stay in the
upper apartment of the jail instead of being confined and chained in the
basement dungeon.

> As Parley continued his narrative, the daring escape, though thwarted,
> had actually aroused the Missourians' admiration: "They now laughed
> with him \[King Follett\] about his adventure, praised him for his
> bravery, and called him a good fellow. The truth of the matter was,
> they had no great desire to take the lives of any but those whom they
> had considered leaders; and since they had discovered that Mr. Follett
> and Mr. Phelps were not considered religious leaders among our
> Society, they were in no great danger, except they should happen to be
> killed in the heat of excitement or passion.

Laura Phelps's travel arrangements were made for her return to the new
Mormon settlement in Quincy, Illinois. She made the journey with a mail
carrier for security and eventually broke away from him when she hit the
Missouri river. As light faded and she became more tired, not knowing
which direction to go to find a place to stay the night and continue the
journey, King and Louisa Follett's son, stumbled across Laura's path and
said "I wonder if you're the woman I'm looking for." Word had likely
reached Loiusa Follett about the failed escape attempt of her husband
and she'd sent 19-year-old John to find Laura and bring her safely back
to Quincy.

Just like the best laid plans of mice and men failed to bring King
Follett his escape from the Columbia jail, our best-laid plans to cover
the life of King Follett for episode number one of our King Follett
discourse series has likewise failed. Instead of making this a
three-hour episode only a tithe of you will actually listen all the way
through, I'm going to break up the biographical sketch of King Follett
into two episodes. We'll pick up next week with him continuing to
languish in the Columbia jail next week and walk through the Illinois
era of King Follett's life until his death. I guess that's what happens
when I try to pack an over 600-page biography of one person into a
single episode, it just grows and grows until, like a cellular division
is necessary to get through everything. I really thought about packing
his 5 years of Illinois life into one and a half pages of script but the
guy is so interesting that I think we all deserve a bit more time with
him to get intimately acquainted.

Of course, the primary source for this episode was Joann Follett
Mortensen's The Man Behind the Discourse; you'll find a link to it in
the show notes. It's an excellent biography/historiography of Follett
and early Mormonism and I obviously left out a lot so I encourage you to
pick up a copy for yourself.

I want to leave everybody with some parting thoughts in light of our
subject matter today. King Follett is an interesting and enigmatic
figure of Mormon history. He's just enigmatic enough that we can take
some lessons away from his story and speculate on his thoughts as he
experienced crucial events during Joseph Smith's Mormonism. King Follett
strikes me as a rather reasonable guy. He wasn't a Wild Ram of the
Mountain Lyman Wight or Captain Fearnought David W. Patten rushing into
battle to build the Mormon empire nor does Follett strike me as a
coolheaded and calculated tyrant like Bloody Brigham Young waiting for
his moment to seize power. King Follett strikes me as a useful marker by
which to measure the general Mormon populous throughout these events. He
wasn't wealthy. He wasn't particularly skilled in a unique way that Jo
would have snagged up and elevated to the anointed quorum. He wasn't
somebody who unflinchingly followed the tides and forces of the radical
movement... at least until push came to shove; and I think that's a
really interesting shift.

You see, King Follett was close friends with the Whitmers and he
advocated on their behalf when the tribunal was held to remove them from
the presidency. He went against Jo, Rigdon, and Bloody Brigham during
their coup of the Missouri Stake presidency. Yet, he wasn't so loyal to
the Whitmers that he defected along with the dozens who did when they
were excommunicated. Instead, he went with the party vote and stuck with
the prophet. Where did it land him? Getting shot at, run out of his home
by state militias, robbing gentile settlements to have enough food to
survive the winter, and it all culminated in leaving his family without
a father during a bitter-cold winter trek of over 500 miles, and left
him in jail for months, chained to the floor without bedding and barely
enough food to remain conscious. He made a series of small decisions, or
refused to make enough small decisions that at the end of 7 years'
association with the radical faction of the Joseph Smith church, King
Follett was branded a traitor to the United States, feared for his life
at the swift hand of the law and when the law was unable to convict him
he was in legitimate danger of vigilante justice taking his life.

This doesn't happen overnight, right? King Follett didn't just wake up
one morning, apropos of nothing, and decide "Hey, I'm going to raid the
local towns for foodstuffs and livestock". He joined the wrong party and
found himself on the wrong side of history but he'd invested so much
time and money into that party that it would have been a departure from
everything he'd known and lived for over half a decade to turn back now.
Then the worst part of this is how his situation could be justified in
his mind. He was in jail because he was being persecuted, not because
he'd committed treason by attacking a state militia. He was hated by the
Missourians because this was the one true church and the scriptures tell
us the true disciples of Christ will be persecuted. The fact he was in
jail for following the one true prophet PROVED he was a true disciple of
Christ.

He landed himself in jail because he was wrong. He was there because
he'd broken laws and his party wasn't powerful enough to acquit him of
clear and objective violations of law. Missouri wasn't Nauvoo and the
Mormon leadership like King Follett were still beholden to the system of
laws we all follow until they had complete and total power in Nauvoo. I
find it remarkable that otherwise law-abiding and good citizens can find
themselves wrapped up in an escalation beyond their comprehension and
never gain the wherewithal to see what's happening until it's too late.
The Folletts seem like good people but that series of small decisions
put them in immediate harms way, they voted and supported people who
were never actually working in their best interest, and what did they
have to show for it? King in jail awaiting a capital offense conviction
while the rest of the family was once again destitute, starving, and
freezing while trying to find a place to live in a swamp nobody wanted.
They did this to themselves and they suffered the consequences. But,
once again, if you asked them why these things happened, they would be
happy to trot out the propaganda they were sold, it's all religious
persecution. Their very minds had been coopted and controlled for years
by a malevolent force that used them for exclusively the growth of its
own power. Good, everyday citizens who were rendered incapable of
impartial judgement of the situation because they'd so deeply swallowed
the pill of balkanization, dogmatism, and sectarian factionalism; the
Folletts were victims of a system beyond the scope of their
understanding. Rational people driven to the fringes of irrationality by
mind control.

That's what I mean when I say the Folletts can provide a useful marker
by which to judge the majority of early Mormon membership throughout
this Kirtland and Missouri era of early Mormonism. At the end of the
day, the legacy of King Follett is marked by an era of Mormon theology
so if that's a marker of success maybe somebody can say all his
sacrifices were for a larger purpose and worth it. But when I look back
at the life of King Follett I see a tired old man, stripped of
everything he ever owned, brainwashed to swear fealty to a system that
never had his interests in mind, and somebody who repeatedly chose party
over morality and suffered the consequences because of it. What's even
more incredible is he and the rest of the Folletts got out of it before
the most radical era of Mormonism. He died before the schism crisis and
before he was forced to decide which self-declared prophet to follow. He
missed the supremacy and anti-government Mormonism that built the great
basin kingdom under the tyrannical rule of Bloody Brigham. He died
before witnessing the bodies of Hyrum and Joseph Smith being carried
into Nauvoo full of bullets from vigilante justice that was too little
and a decade too late. Even so, had he not been crushed by a bucket of
rocks in March of 1844, I'm satisfied that his autonomy and free will
had so long been stolen from him by Joseph Smith that he would've
marched to the end of the earth to maintain Jo's tyrannical rule. People
who've been beaten and abused for over a decade rarely break the mold
they're forced into and King Follett was just as much a victim of that
spine-crushing mind control as the thousands of others who called Jo
their prophet, priest, and king. He is the messenger of manifest destiny
to bring about the kingdom of god and anything Jo does can't be wrong
because it's in the public interest of building that kingdom. King
Follett fell perfectly in line with the goosestep march toward global
Mormon supremacy which makes him complicit in every crime Joseph Smith
committed. Instead, he's venerated as a patriot of Zion and his name
rings throughout Mormon households synonymous with Jo's greatest
theological sermon. King Follett seemed perfectly pleased with being a
puppet of the master and only rarely tugged back on the controlling
strings. No matter what we learn about our leaders, whoever they may be,
I hope we may all be bestowed with the power to tug on those strings.

Patrons:

Lucius

New ultimate pledge from Kyle. We have a new ... of outer darkness
glory. Kyle has subscribed to our highest level of patron support with a
very generous pledge and he and I are in discussion about an
individualized reward properly fitting for a new force of this magnitude
within the NaMo family to be reckoned with. Thank you very much, Kyle.
