---
layout: post
title: >
    Road to Carthage 7 – Pride
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-221-road-carthage-7-pride/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/road-to-carthage-7-pride
libsyn_embed: 15699083

category: RTC
date: 2020-08-20 20:00:00 PDT
---

Road to Carthage 7 - Pride

On this episode, we examine the pride and arrogance of Joseph Smith,
founder of Mormonism.

Show links:  
Website
[<u>http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com</u>](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [<u>@NakedMormonism</u>](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook
[<u>https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311</u>](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311)  
Patreon
[<u>http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism</u>](http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism)  
Music by Jason Comeau
[<u>http://aloststateofmind.com/</u>](http://aloststateofmind.com/)  
Show Artwork
[<u>http://weirdmormonshit.com/</u>](http://weirdmormonshit.com/)  
Legal Counsel [<u>http://patorrez.com/</u>](http://patorrez.com/)

I’m proud to be an American\!

Why? Why is being born in a certain time in a certain place something to
take pride in? Is it the indoctrination of nationalism that invades our
culture and everyday conversations, slowly degrading the foundations of
societies across the world? There’s nothing wrong with taking pride in
what we do; what we achieve, what we accomplish, what we create. We take
pride in these because we worked for them. Pride, however, carries a
stigma. So much so, that there are entire lesson manuals in the church
about the pride cycle.

The pride cycle from the Book of Mormon goes like this. The chosen
people of god are super righteous and god blesses them with wealth and
prosperity. Then, they become prideful and forget that god is
responsible for giving them all their worldly possessions. They fall
away from god, and god curses them, thus destroying everything that gave
them pride to begin with, killing their friends and families, and often
burning their cities to the ground. This causes the chosen people to be
humbled by the curses of god. They become righteous because of this
humbling and change in skin color to whiteness and delightsomeness and
then god begins to bless them. The cycle then repeats and thus we have
what’s known to Mormons as The Pride Cycle. It exists in the macro with
various cities and groups of people in the Book of Mormon but it’s also
a pattern that emerges when considering the entire narrative of the Book
of Mormon’s 3000 year story. Just like any work of literature, the Book
of Mormon contains lessons we can take from its pages that are never
printed in any church-printed manual for actual instruction. We can’t
have the masses pondering their existence and morality beyond what we
tell them, can we? Nobody will give you the knowledge you need to
overthrow them.

Whether it’s the noble unwilling leader rising to greatness in a time of
calamity, 3 magi wandering time and space teaching mortals the mysteries
of existence, an promising underdog who overcomes great trials and
receives recognition from a member of high society, initiates learning
their strengths and weaknesses, the cycle of life, death, and the
rebirth of people and nations, the dichotomies of peace and war, light
and dark, good and evil, wealth and poverty, the Book of Mormon actually
contains some story-telling elements of chaos and Hermetic philosophy
that are worth exploration in the abstract, ignoring the claims of
divinity. It’s because of these deeper lessons, all replete throughout
what we consider the great classic literature, that nuanced believers
can consider the Book of Mormon as divinely inspired while not being
accurate history. Those people see divinely inspired lessons in every
work of art, literature, and philosophy regardless of whether or not the
work claims to be scripture. I see these lessons too without any appeal
to divine origin. They’re stories that have existed for thousands of
years and underpin nearly every element of philosophical exploration. We
take the lessons, repackage them, change the names of the protagonist
and antagonist, and retell a different story with the same lesson
underneath it all. Every story has been told, every word has been
spoken. The more of these stories we consume, the more we see the
connective threads; the more the strings that tug on reality come into
focus. Only then can we spread our wings to fly far away and teach these
lessons to the next generation. Somehow, someday, I hope you’ll
understand.

Samantha Payne, a schoolmate of Joseph Smith in Manchester, New York,
said in 1880 that “he was regarded as … a braggadocio,” among other
things. Confidence is an attractive feature. But confidence, like every
other character trait, is a tool that can be wielded for good and evil
alike. Confidence has a few ugly twins, arrogance, narcissism, audacity,
and taken to extremes confidence can morph into a god complex.

Jo’s arrogance is clearly rooted in his childhood, like every other
narcissist who preceded and followed him. According to a New York
neighbor named Daniel Hendrix, Lucy Mack Smith was “a great admirer of
her son, despite his shiftless and provoking ways. She always declared
that he was born with a genius, and did not have to work.” According to
Hendrix, she once remarked that “the boy will be able some of these days
to buy the whole of Palmyra and all the folks in it. You don’t know what
a brain my boy has under that old hat” (EMD 3:212). Neighbor Wallace
Miner, on whose land Joe dug out a 20-foot cave, claimed that Mother
Lucy “was told in a dream she would give birth to a son who would be a
great leader” (EMD 3:255). Orsamus Turner, a local historian, wrote in
1851 that “The incipient hints, the first givings out that a Prophet was
to spring from her humble household, came from her” (EMD 3:48).

In a large family with scarce resources, arrogance became a survival
mechanism to get more attention, and therefore resources, than his
siblings. This evolved beyond the Smith family dynamics and became a
success formula in Jo’s teenage years. Ep 10, 11, 12.

Joe carefully crafted a reputation as a powerful seer and conjuror
during his treasure-digging days, but in the Book of Mormon he took the
myth of Joseph Smith to the next level. In the autobiographical first
portion of the Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi Chapter 3, the prophet Lehi is on
his deathbed, speaking to his son Nephi. Lehi says,

> 4 For behold, thou art the fruit of my loins; and I am a descendant of
> Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. . . . 6 For Joseph truly
> testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be
> a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins. 7 Yea, Joseph truly said:
> Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the
> fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of
> thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a
> work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great
> worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the
> covenants which I have made with thy fathers. 8 And I will give unto
> him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work
> which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for
> he shall do my work. 9 And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I
> have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of
> Israel. . . 13 And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that
> day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the
> restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord. 14 And thus
> prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and
> they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise,
> which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be
> fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise; 15 And
> his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of
> his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the
> Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall
> bring my people unto salvation.

Mormons are taught in Sunday school that this is the Book of Mormon
prophecy of Joseph Smith. But if we view the Book of Mormon not as an
ancient history, but a product of Jo’s own mind, Joe produced this
ancient book of scripture, and into it he writes a prophecy about
himself: a future “choice seer” named Joseph, the son of Joseph,
descended from the Book of Mormon prophet Nephi and the biblical prophet
Joseph of Egypt. He will be great like Moses, and he’ll save the entire
world, and anyone who dares to oppose him will be crushed by the power
of God. And oh, my favorite part: God commands him to do no work except
the work of God. Remember a few episodes ago when we went through 30
pages of script about Jo’s idleness and his desire to avoid physical
labor at all costs? That revelation about him not having any strength in
temporal labors also makes its way into the Book of Mormon. All things
considered, if writing a new book of scripture as a sequel to the Bible
weren’t audacious enough, writing a prophecy about himself into that
book of scripture says a lot about Jo’s character and opinion of
himself. Ep 17.

Joe didn’t stop at writing himself into the Book of Mormon. That wasn’t
enough for him, so he also created his own inspired revision of the
BIBLE. And he “restored” a lot of “plain and precious parts” that he
claimed had been removed from the Bible by the eeeevil Catholics,
including a version of that same “choice seer” prophecy that appears in
the Book of Mormon. Genesis chapter 50 has eleven-and-a-half brand new
verses, all about the future coming of Joseph, son of Joseph. I won’t
read them to you, because they’re basically cut-and-pasted right out of
the Book of Mormon passage I already read. So many Christians consider
Joseph Smith or Mormonism to be anti-Christ or heretical; the charge is
understandable when we consider the sanctity of the Bible itself and
Jo’s audacity in writing his own version to complement all his other
scriptures and revelations.

The very act of writing new scripture is arrogant to begin with, but I
want to examine an aspect of Jo’s scriptures that bear strict scrutiny,
white supremacy, the most caustic, divisive, deadly, and hereditary of
all versions of arrogance. People will often claim that Joseph was
progressive considering he ordained a black man, Elijah Able, into the
priesthood. Well, Elijah Able was a rather white and delightsome
African-American, and it’s unclear whether Joe even knew he had African
ancestry or maybe Jo ordained Able as an example of how a black man can
become righteous enough that his skin will turn white and delightsome.
It was Brigham Young who applied the curse of Cain to black people and
barred them from getting the priesthood, but he built that priesthood
ban policy on teachings from the scriptures that Joe wrote. Jo’s own
priesthood discrimination is far more conjectural and less defined than
Bloody Brigham’s.

In Joe’s translation of Genesis, he makes some changes to the Bible
story in which Noah gets drunk and his son Ham makes fun of him. In the
original Bible story, after Noah sobers up, he curses Ham’s son Canaan
to be a servant to his brothers. In Joe’s version of the story, Noah’s
cursing of Canaan includes not only servitude, but also black skin. And
I quote, “there was a blackness come upon all the Children of Canaan
that they were dispised among all people . . . Noah awoke from his wine
and k\[n\]ew what his younger son had done unto him, and he said cursed
be Canaan a Servent of servents shall he be unto his breatheren and he
said blessed be the Lord God of Shem and Canaan shall be his servent and
a vail of darkness shall cover him that he shall be known among all
men.” Jo provided a religious explanation for keeping black people in
slavery, just like every other anti-abolitionist Christian of his time.
His explanation, however, didn’t involve interpretation of Biblical
verses so much as rewriting them to say what he wanted them to say.

The Book of Mormon, JS translation of the Bible, Book of Moses, Book of
Abraham, and Doctrine and Covenants, all include multiple passages of
white supremacy and manifest destiny. We don’t have to discuss the
damage caused to humanity by these elitist concepts because we’ve
discussed them ad nauseum on this show. Eps 165, 170, 189, 214.

As Jo’s ministry matured, he continued to elevate himself above all
else. Whether it was dissenters in the ranks, rival religious groups, or
religious instruction concerning the mysteries of gods kingdom, Jo
always needed to be the epicenter of expertise and attention in his
religious group. A cult of personality centered around the religious
dicta of one man is just a religious cult. Jo hoarded the limelight and
attention of any group of people, a polarizing character trait that
served to build him up and tear him down at different points in his
life. In Kirtland we see a dramatic example of this when we examine the
Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Abraham.

In August 1835, Oliver Cowdery… Cowdung Allover… because nicknames are
hard… you know what, screw it, I’m proud of it as one of my earliest
creations even if it wasn’t my best work. COWDUNG ALLOVER presented the
Doctrine and Covenants to the Church leadership, and a bunch of guys got
up and testified that it was true, and then they all voted to accept it
as scripture. Now, here’s the weird part about this. Most of these
revelations had already been published a few years earlier, in the 1833
Book of Commandments, which had a limited printing because the Missouri
mob burned down the printing press in the middle of production, making
the surviving copies super rare. If you have a Book of Commandments,
give me a call, I’m sure we can work something out and my dignity is
dirt cheap. Now the Church republished them in the Doctrine and
Covenants in 1835 with the Lectures on Faith as part of the production.
But, Jo and a committee of other Church leaders heavily edited the
revelations in between these two publications with only 2 years
separating them. There are thousands and thousands of differences. And
yet these are supposed to be revelations from God\! That same god that
said I’m the same yesterday, today, and forever… just changed his mind.
If I’m God and I give my words to a prophet, and within two years that
miscreant makes radical changes to the words I gave him, I’d be pretty
pissed… Maybe I’d even curse the dude for changing my unchangeable
words. These words in the D\&C are immutable truths meant to be passed
down through generations of believers in me, and they have the arrogance
to change the words that came out of my mouth through my mouthpiece who
I went through the trouble of appearing in the woods to just 10 years
earlier?\! How dare you, Joseph Smith?\! How dare you think you know the
mind of god better than god himself?\! Either God messed up or Jo had to
retcon god’s words to fit an evolving narrative. This is maddening
because people often talk about the thousands of edits in the Book of
Mormon like that’s a problem to the narrative; it is, but what about the
tens of thousands of changes in the Doctrine and Covenants. Maybe Jo
made an error in translating the gold plates, but there’s absolutely no
excuse for changing the direct revelations from god after the
revelations are initially dictated. Friend of the show, Joel Kuhn,
Indiana, made an awesome tool for comparing the different versions of
the D\&C at comparedandc.com. Look it up, see for yourself just how much
god changes his mind about consequential and important stuff in early
Mormonism. Or, just listen to My Book of Mormon podcast and you’ll hear
about all the differences in historical context.

The D\&C are one thing, but let’s talk about the Book of Abraham, we
need to discuss a man named Antonio Lebolo. Antonio Lebolo was the
superintendent over a huge archaeological dig site in Egypt between 1818
and 1822. He was tasked with coordinating the discovered and stolen
artifacts. Lebolo amassed a large collection of Egyptian Papyri and
mummies to be shipped to a collector in New York, where Michael Chandler
was able to purchase a bunch of these for resale. Chandler paraded these
mummies and Papyri around the east coast from 1833 to 1835, selling some
of them, and charging people to view them. Chandler made a pretty good
living on the road with these artifacts, but his biggest score was
awaiting him in Kirtland, Ohio. While Chandler was charging 25 cents for
adults to view the artifacts, he would soon be given $2400 for the
purchase of all the remaining artifacts in his possession -- that’s
about $62,000 today. Ep 33.

On July 3<sup>rd</sup>, 1835, he found his way to Kirtland. He may have
heard about Joe’s miraculous translating abilities. Joe looked at the
papyrus scrolls and pronounced them to be the records of the biblical
patriarchs Abraham and Joseph. Well, not a single person in America at
the time could read Egyptian hieroglyphics, so there was no one to
gainsay Joe. Being the astute artifact dealer he was, Chandler supported
Joe’s claim of their origins as a sales tactic. He gave Joe a signed
certificate that said, “from the information that I could ever learn, or
meet with \[about the meaning of these papyri\], I find that of Mr.
Joseph Smith, Jun., to correspond in the most minute matter.”

According to the History of the Church, “Soon after this, some of the
Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus, a description of
which will appear hereafter, and with WW. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as
scribes, I commenced the translation of some of the characters or
hieroglyphics.” Joe wasn’t as interested in the mummies as he was in the
papyri, but Chandler refused to sell one without the other, and he
charged Joe $2400 for the lot and left Kirtland with a smile on his face
and pockets full of coin. Apologists will point to Chandler’s signed
statement as proof that the Book of Abraham is what Jo claimed it to be,
but why would Chandler contradict the almighty prophet of the almighty
god when he could sell the artifacts for an order of magnitude more than
he would have sold them anywhere else? Michael Chandler being a good
salesman is a greater indictment of Jo’s knowledge and expertise than
Chandler’s.

Joe immediately began translating, but he only got a couple chapters of
the Book of Abraham and a booklet called the Egyptian Alphabet and
Grammar done before he back-burnered the project for 7 years. The fact
that the translations weren’t yet complete didn’t stop the prophet from
leveraging the papyri and mummies in the meantime. The 4 mummies out of
their respective sarcophagi and the papyri were exhibited in Kirtland in
the uppermost floor of the temple once completed in early 1836. Joe was
way more interested in having real-life antiquities to show off than he
was in translating whatever the papyri actually said. One was a money
maker, the other required actual effort and creative writing.

Finally, in March of 1842, nearly 7 years after acquisition of the
Egyptian collection, he authored a few more chapters of the Book of
Abraham and published them in the Church periodical “The Times and
Seasons.” along with 3 illustrations copied from the papyri. Joseph’s
interpretations of these documents obviously don’t line up with what
Egyptologists say they mean. These are common Egyptian funeral documents
that were buried with a corpse in order to guide the dead person into
the afterlife. They contain magic spells and invocations to various
Egyptian gods. But Jo turned the whole thing into an autobiographical
account written by the biblical patriarch Abraham, who supposedly lived
about 1000 BCE, “by his own hand upon papyrus.” Eps 103, 104.

The Book of Abraham contains plenty more white supremacy and serves as
the explicit scriptural basis for the priesthood ban. In Joe’s
translation of the illustration known as Facsimile 3, he interprets the
black-skinned god Anubis as a slave. And in Chapter 1, verses 26 and 27
of the Book of Abraham, we read this:

> Pharaoh, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his
> people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate
> that order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the
> days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and
> also of Noah, his father, who blessed him with the blessings of the
> earth, and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining
> to the Priesthood. Now, Pharaoh being of that lineage by which he
> could not have the right of Priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs
> would fain claim it from Noah, through Ham, therefore my father was
> led away by their idolatry.

Remember, the lineage of Ham was the one that Joe claimed Noah cursed
with dark skin and slavery. Now Joe is saying that Ham’s lineage is also
“cursed as pertaining to the priesthood.” So Brigham Young may have been
the one who made it official Church policy that black men couldn’t be
ordained, but Joe’s the one who made up the whole white supremacist myth
that policy is based on and wrote it into Mormon scripture from all
eternity to all eternity. That’s why anything short of decanonization of
this wretched little book won’t suffice. Burn it. Burn all the Books of
Abraham. They’re pure 19th-century white supremacy masquerading as the
words of the almighty god. The least the church today could do is put a
disclaimer at the front of their scriptures talking about them being a
product of their time. Warner Brothers does it with their cartoons from
the 1950s and when a Christian media company that produced such gems as
“sunday go to meetin’ time, Confederate Honey, coal black and de
sebben dwarfs, Goldilocks and the jivin’ bears, Tokio Jokio, and Bugs
Bunny nips the nips” has the upper hand on Mormonism when it comes to
race issues there’s something deeply and cynically wrong. I’m sure
Warner Brothers made lots of money off that racism when those cartoons
were popular so those disclaimers in front of them nowadays don’t hurt
the royalty checks anymore. I digress...

Chapter 3 of the Book of Abraham is where things get really interesting.
While he worked on the Book of Abraham, Joe was studying Hebrew, reading
the Jewish historian Josephus, and also reading a book by Thomas Dick on
philosophy and astronomy. Jo just couldn’t resist the opportunity to
show off all his worldly knowledge in the Book of Abraham. Check this
out:

> And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had
> given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars also that
> they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne
> of God; and there were many great ones, which were near unto it; and
> the Lord said unto me, these are the governing ones; and the name of
> the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me: for I am the Lord
> thy God, I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the
> same order of that upon which thou standest. And the Lord said unto
> me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the
> Lord, according to its times and seasons in the Revolutions thereof,
> that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of
> reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed
> unto that whereon thou standest; this is the reckoning of the Lord’s
> time, according to the reckoning of Kolob.

A few things to discuss here. Abraham looks into his peep stone and sees
that God lives on a planet near a star named Kolob, and that planet
revolves around its sun so slowly that it takes a thousand Earth years
to make a single revolution, although to God this apparently only feels
like one day.

Astronomy wasn’t actually Joe’s strong suit, but he knew just enough to
feel supremely confident in writing scriptures about it. There’s a lot
of gobbledegook in the Book of Abraham, so I won’t read you the whole
thing, but the gist of it is that there’s a hierarchy of celestial
bodies in the universe, and as you move up the hierarchy, the celestial
bodies become more luminous and time slows down. Time is slower on the
moon than it is on the earth, and slower on the sun than it is on the
moon, and so forth up the hierarchy of celestial bodies until you come
to Kolob, which has the slowest time of all and governs the entire
visible universe that we can see when we look up at the stars at night.
This should make Kolob pretty easy to identify by modern astronomers,
one would think.

Kolob has two companion stars that together basically comprise a
celestial first presidency, then there are twelve moving stars like a
celestial Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and twelve fixed stars like a
celestial high council. The whole universe is structured like the
priesthood of the Church, and the primacy of Kolob over the universe is
cosmic evidence of the primacy of Joseph Smith over the Church. Not only
did this egomaniac write himself into the Bible, but he also wrote
himself into the literal stars through his scriptures.

But, another thing that absolutely cannot escape our skeptical eye is
the term Kolob itself. From where did Jo get this unique and odd term?
He probably picked it up during his first round of Hebrew studies after
the Egyptian papyri were purchased. Hebrew is an efficient language of
consonants, meaning translators are responsible for putting in the
vowels they best estimate to match the meaning of the original author.
That means Kolob in Hebrew would just be KLB, which translates to dog.
This has led Mormons to speculate that Kolob is actually sirius, or
Alpha Canis Majoris, also called “the Dog Star”, as it’s the brightest
star in the night sky. You can see it in the night sky by tracing the
three stars of Orion’s Belt that form a line to the nose of Canis
Majoris, which is the Dog Star. From that passage in the Book of Abraham
claiming Kolob is the brightest star was just Jo using the Hebrew word
for Canis Majoris and saying “God lives there” while pointing at the
brightest star in the sky. However, where I find this to be interesting
is where the term klb or “Dog” comes up in the Bible. In the Bible, dogs
are always defiled and dirty creatures. In Deuteronomy ch 23:18 we find
where dogs are held in regard as low as prostitutes. KJV

> Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into
> the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these are
> abomination unto the LORD thy God.

Basically, if you’re making a money offering to god as tithing, you
better not make your money by being a sex worker, or give him the price
a dog costs? That doesn’t seem right. Well, let’s look at the NIV
translation of the same verse to see if klb can take on a different
meaning.

> You must not bring the earnings of a female prostitute or of a male
> prostitute into the house of the LORD your God to pay any vow, because
> the LORD your God detests them both.

When the Book of Abraham was published and the passage we read earlier
was actually fleshed out, polygamy was being practiced among the closest
acolytes of the prophet; he’d soon write the revelation that the only
men who ascend to become gods are those with multiple wives. Yes… Joseph
Smith said that god grew up on a planet nearest the star… gigolo. Not
only does god have probably millions of wives that we don’t talk about
because we may or may not have the same heavenly mother from one dude,
but god grew up on a planet ruled by the star male sex worker.

Did… did Jo just get us all? Was that deliberate? The word Kolob had to
come from somewhere in his brain… Like… did he just send a signal to
everybody in the future who’d study him? Was that one of the mysteries
to his kingdom that only those with spiritual eyes could see? If so,
that’s boldfaced egotism if ever I did see it in all my days studying
this hubris-filled narcissist.

After moving to Missouri, one project Joe worked on there in 1838 was an
official history of his life. Moses had the Book of Moses, Abraham had
the Book of Abraham, Nephi had the Book of Nephi. This was Joe Smith’s
Book of Joe Smith. He used it to construct an epic legend of his life
and to smooth over some rough spots in his personal autobiography. And
when I say smooth over some rough spots, I mean he totally revised and
fabricated facts about his life and apologists have been shouldered with
the unenviable task of harmonizing the plot holes ever since.

I can think of no greater example of historical revisionism than Joseph
Smith’s first-vision account. From his first iteration in 1832 to this
official 1839 version that’s canonized as Mormon scripture in the Pearl
of Great Price, dozens of important foundational claims are wildly
different and the first vision serves to be a catalyst for many people
losing their Mormon faith. Eps 19, 24, 32, 33.

Joe had written his first account of the First Vision in 1832. According
to this account, he felt convicted of his sins, and he couldn’t find a
church that matched the one he had read about in the New Testament, so
he prayed and “the Lord” appeared and forgave him of his sins. This 1832
story was already an evolution from the first dictated account written
by Ollie which became Book of Commandments Ch 24, or modern D\&C section
20.

> For, after it truly was manifested unto this first elder \[Joseph
> Smith\], that he had received a remission of his sins, he was
> entangled again in the vanities of the world;
> 
> But after truly repenting, God ministered unto him by an holy angel,
> whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and
> white above all whiteness, and gave unto him commandments which
> inspired him from on high, and gave unto him power, by the means which
> were before prepared, that he should translate a book;

There’s absolutely nothing in there about God or Jesus appearing, just
god ministering to Jo through a supremely white angel who’s unnamed and
doesn’t determine whether it was a resurrected being or a spirit. Jo
wouldn’t come up with the handshake litmus test for true or familiar
spirits for another few years. This is actually the first dictated
version of the first vision, but it wasn’t published until 1833, making
his own 1832 account generally agreed to be the first first vision
account. But even from his 1830 dictation of his revelation to the 1832
version he wrote by his own hand we see legendary evolution to serve a
false narrative of divine sanction when no such thing ever actually
happened.

He wrote his second account in 1835. In this version it wasn’t his sins
that bothered him; it was that he couldn’t decide which church was true.
So he went to the woods and prayed about it, but he encountered some
kind of demonic opposition that swelled his tongue in his mouth so he
couldn’t speak, and he heard footsteps approaching from behind him.
Cotton mouth is an annoying side effect some of us are all too familiar
with. On his third attempt to pray, he finally broke free of the demonic
influence and called out in mighty prayer. A pillar of fire appeared,
and a “personage” told him his sins were forgiven and Jesus is the son
of God. He also saw many angels. The 1832 account hadn’t mentioned the
demonic attack, the pillar of fire, or the angels.

And finally, in 1838, he gave the version in his official history. This
version starts the same way as the 1835 account: he was trying to figure
out which church is true, so he prayed in the woods, and his tongue
swelled in his mouth. But instead of hearing footsteps behind him, in
this version he saw darkness all around him. He had his breakthrough
moment and saw a pillar of light, but in this version there were two
personages in the light rather than just one, and “One of them spake
unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—*This is My
Beloved Son. Hear Him\!*” Joe asked the personages which of the churches
is true, and

> I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong;
> and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an
> abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt;
> that: “they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far
> from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a
> form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.”

Boy, God and Jesus sure have a lot to say in this version that Joe
apparently neglected to mention in 1832 and 1835. And, wait… God *and*
Jesus? Why do we suddenly have two personages when in the previous
versions it was just one? Jesus was there with his dad, and you just
forgot to mention that? And where did the pantheon of angels go?

With these few conflicting details about the nature of god, I’m barely
even scratching the surface of the historical revisionism that Joe does
in his official history. The details of his vision of Moroni change,
too. In some versions, *he gives the angel’s name as Nephi, not
Moroni*\! JOE\! The angel told you his name, and you can’t keep it
straight? Was it Nephi or Moroni??? In the span of 7 years in New York
and Kirtland, Jo not only changed the very words of god in the Book of
Mormon, Doctrine & Covenants, and Bible, but he even changed the very
nature of god from a single personage in the sky, to legions of angels,
to god again, to god and Jesus in corporeal form, and forgot the name of
the angel who appeared to him who happened to be an integral character
in the Book of Mormon narrative and how the plates got buried in New
York for Jo to translate to begin with. You think George R.R. Martin
ever mixes up Ned Stark with Jon Snow in his interviews? It was never
Joseph Smith himself who made the mistake, it was the author of the
Evening and the Morning Star article… okay… That’s Ollie; You think
George R.R. Martin’s writing assistant ever mixes up Ned Stark and Jon
Snow?

All of these inconsistencies wouldn’t be a problem if Jo’s latest story
wasn’t canonized scripture because scripture is supposed to be God's
word and therefore perfect. But it is and now we have M. Russell Ballard
standing up in General Conference offering low-rent pseudo-apologetics
about his great great uncle by claiming we’re blessed to have at least 4
different accounts of the first vision. Replete throughout this era of
the History of the Church we find Jo and his closest acolytes preaching
about his history and how the Book of Mormon came to be. The propaganda
campaign started early and the very survival of the church relied on
people believing Jo’s lie. You lie for long enough to enough people and
they’ll call it their sincerely-held religious belief. To fabricate a
story, alter it to serve selfish ends, then canonize it as scripture,
meaning the holy word of god, then convince legions of foot-soldiers to
spread those lies, is an act of narcissistic self-importance that would
cause Eli Bosnick to blush, and he’s utterly shameless. Sure, you were a
9/11 truther at one point, but has anybody actually verified that story?
Has anybody compared his different tellings of when he first met Noah?
It just beggars belief.

Moving on\! We’ve already talked quite a bit about Joe’s midnight flight
from Kirtland, Ohio to Far West, Missouri in December 1837, and his role
in starting a war against the Missourians throughout 1838. So if you’ve
listened to the rest of this series or episodes 39-50, then you already
know that the Mormons had made an agreement to stay in Caldwell County,
but when Joe showed up, he decided that God wanted the Saints to expand
into Daviess County and establish the settlement of Adam-ondi-Ahman
there. This would become a twin city Mormon headquarters to complement
Far West in Caldwell County, thus expanding the tactical advantages in
the coming war.

What I haven’t talked about yet is where the name Adam-ondi-Ahman comes
from. On May 19, 1838, Joe visited the area where he wanted to put a
settlement. Lyman Wight had already built a house there. According to
the History of the Church,

> We pursued our course up the river, mostly through timber, for about
> eighteen miles, when we arrived at Colonel Lyman Wight's home. He
> lives at the foot of Tower Hill (a name I gave the place in
> consequence of the remains of an old Nephite altar or tower that stood
> the\[r\]e), where we camped for the Sabbath. In the afternoon I went
> up the river about half a mile to Wight's Ferry, accompanied by
> President Rigdon, and my clerk, George W. Robinson, for the purpose of
> selecting and laying claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess
> County, township 60, ranges 27 and 28, and sections 25, 36, 31, and
> 30, which the brethren called "Spring Hill," but by the mouth of the
> Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said He, it is the place
> where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days
> shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet.

That bit about this being the place where Adam will come to sit in
judgment in the last days is canonized in LDS scripture as D\&C 116. But
there’s more. Not only was this a Book of Mormon location with an old
Nephite altar, not only was it the place where Adam would return in the
last days, but it was also the place where Adam and Eve offered
sacrifices after they were expelled from the Garden of Eden. According
to Heber C. Kimball on pages 209-210 of *The Life of Heber C. Kimball*,

> The Prophet Joseph called upon Brother Brigham, myself and others,
> saying, “Brethren, come, go along with me, and I will show you
> something,” He led us a short distance to a place where were the ruins
> of three altars built of stone, one above the other, and one standing
> a little back of the other, like unto the pulpits in the Kirtland
> Temple, representing the order of three grades of Priesthood; “There,”
> said Joseph, “is the place where Adam offered up sacrifice after he
> was cast out of the garden.” The altar stood at the highest point of
> the bluff. I went and examined the place several times while I
> remained there.

Listen. Joe wanted to put a settlement here, but he knew that his people
had made an agreement not to. So he had to give them *really good
reasons* to feel like this land belonged to them, no matter what they
had agreed to with the Missourians. So he came up with stories about
Nephites and Adam and Eve having lived here. Once again, You’re making
stuff up again, Joseph. He did this all the time, on the spot, to serve
short-sighted ends and those lies have forced over a century and a half
of apologists to try to harmonize and figure out exactly how the Garden
of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri, while all the descendants of
Adam and Eve were Israelites in the middle east. Some say everything in
the bible before the flood actually happened in America and Noah’s ark
was built here, only to convey Noah to Mount Ararat when the flood was
over and the reset button was hit for all life on earth. Or maybe once
they left the Garden of Eden they wandered across the Atlantic Ocean all
the way to modern-day Jerusalem before they had Cain and Abel. Maybe the
spaceship that brought Jehovah, Peter, James, and John here just picked
up Adam and Eve and plopped them down in northern Africa as a courtesy.
I suppose pesky little facts like the Bible narrative itself don’t much
matter when you’re making your own militant Christian cult.

The fact of the matter is, Joe didn’t think he had to abide by any
agreements with the Missourians, because he thought he was invincible.
Here’s an excerpt from a sermon he gave during the Missouri Mormon War
that resulted from his decision to expand into Daviess County. This is
from the *History of Reed Peck*.

> We have yielded to the mob in Dewitt and now they are preparing to
> strike a blow in Daviess, but I am determined that we will not give
> another foot and I care not how many come against us, 10 or 10000 God
> will send his angels to our deliverance and we can conquer 10000 as
> easily as 10\[\!\]

Joe clearly had delusions of single-handedly fighting off entire armies
with nothing but his god-power-infused fisticuffs. Obviously no angels
showed up, though, and Joe got a wake-up call when thousands of state
militiamen surrounded Far West ready to exterminate every single Mormon.
Fortunately for Joe’s followers, he came to his senses and realized that
he couldn’t win this fight through sheer force of ego. He ordered his
troops to lay down their arms and surrendered the town, immediately
sending a messenger to Adam-Ondi-Ahman instructing the leadership there
to do the same. A military leader worth his salt doesn’t buckle before a
shot is fired in the actual battle. Jo was a poser and his entire public
persona required he never break that prideful facade.

In Illinois Joe had a couple encounters that reminded him of Michael
Chandler showing up in Kirtland with the Egyptian papyri and mummies,
and he tried to duplicate his earlier success with the Book of Abraham.
Unfortunately for Joe, both of these encounters were hoaxes designed to
expose him for the fraud he was, and in his arrogance he fell for both
of them.

In the first case, a contemporary critic of Joseph Smith named Henry
Caswell picked up a copy of the March 1842 *Times and Seasons*, in which
was printed the Book of Abraham and the facsimiles from which the Book
of Abraham was supposedly translated. Caswell, a professor and reverend,
donned regular street clothes and embarked upon a journey to Nauvoo.
Caswell had on his person a copy of a Greek Psalter-- in other words, a
manuscript of the book of Psalms from the Bible, written in Greek. The
one Caswell had with him he estimated to be from about the 1200s C.E.

The day he arrived he toured the city. At Newell K. Whitney’s store he
“mentioned that I had been informed that Mr. Smith possessed some
remarkable Egyptian curiosities, which I wished to see. I added that, if
Mr. Smith could be induced to show me his treasures, I would show him in
return a very wonderful book which had lately come into my possession.”
He showed the worm-eaten book to the storekeeper and a group of
spectators, one of whom “declared that he knew it to be a revelation
from the Lord, and that probably it was one of the lost books of the
Bible providentially recovered. Looking at me with a patronizing air, he
assured me that I had brought it to the right place to get it
interpreted, for that none on earth but the Lord's Prophet could explain
it, or unfold its real antiquity and value.” The storekeeper agreed to
set up a meeting between Caswell and Joe.

When Caswell went to meet Joe, a crowd gathered, clamoring to see the
book.

> I met Joseph Smith at a short distance from his dwelling, and was
> regularly introduced to him by the storekeeper. . . . On entering the
> house, chairs were provided for the prophet and myself, while the
> curious and gaping spectators remained standing. I handed the book to
> the prophet, and begged him to explain its contents. He asked me if I
> had any idea of its meaning. I replied, that I believed it to be a
> Greek Psalter; but that I should like to hear his opinion. "No he
> said; "it ain't Greek at all, except, perhaps, a few words. What ain't
> Greek, is Egyptian; and what ain't Egyptian, is Greek. This book is
> very valuable. It is a dictionary of Egyptian Hieroglyphics." Pointing
> to the capital letters at the commencement of each verse, he said:
> Them figures is Egyptian hieroglyphics; and them which follows, is the
> interpretation of the hieroglyphics, written in the reformed Egyptian.
> Them characters is like the letters that was engraved on the golden
> plates."

Joe offered to buy the book, which was worth nothing to Caswell, since
he couldn’t read it. Caswell declined and said the book was worth many
hundred dollars. He also declined to lend the book to Joe. Caswell then
wrapped up the book and asked Joe to show him the Egyptian papyrus.

> He \[Joe\] produced the glass frames which I had seen on the previous
> day; but he did not appear very forward to explain the figures. I
> pointed to a particular hieroglyphic, and requested him to expound its
> meaning. No answer being returned, I looked up, and behold\! the
> prophet had disappeared. The Mormons told me that he had just stepped
> out, and would probably soon return. I waited some time, but in vain:
> and at length descended to the street in front of the store. Here I
> heard the noise of wheels, and presently I saw the prophet in a light
> waggon, flourishing his whip and driving away as fast as two fine
> horses could draw him. As he disappeared from view, enveloped in a
> cloud of dust, I felt that I had turned over another page in the great
> book of human nature.

I think we all get that sense occasionally when we study the life of
Joseph Smith. After Caswell’s interaction with Jo and Jo quickly fleeing
the scene of his own stupidity, Caswell approached Willard Richards
about the scenario, to which White-out Willard said, “sometimes Mr.
Smith speaks as a prophet, and sometimes as a mere man.” This story
highlights Jo’s arrogance and the ability of his friends to cover for
his lies. It didn’t matter the subject, Jo always had to be the most
knowledgeable in the room about it. Then, when he clearly lied, people
like White-out Willard were there to equivocate and excuse the behavior.
Millions have fallen into line behind these lies to protect the precious
name of a conceited man whose only abilities where he excelled were
habitually lying.

The second hoax happened the following year, in 1843. It was perpetrated
by a man named Wilbur Fugate and his two friends, Robert Wiley and
Bridge Whitton. These guys were 3 jolly gents living in a town near
Nauvoo called Kinderhook, Illinois, right near Quincy where the saints
first settled after the Missouri exodus. Similar to Caswell, these guys
devised a plan to lure Jo into a trap to make him look a fool. However,
these three weren’t satisfied with presenting a simple Greek Psalter to
the self-proclaimed prophet and seeing what happened, they took it to
the next level. Wilbur Fugate had some level of metallurgical expertise.
He, along with Wiley and Whitton made a set of six plates and used some
chemicals to etch them, making them appear ancient to untrained eyes. On
April 16, 1843, they put their plan into play. They claimed to have
found the plates in an Indian burial mound near Kinderhook, along with
the skeleton of a nine-foot-tall giant. Then they took them to Nauvoo to
show them to the almighty prophet who could translate unknown languages.

In his journal for May 7, 1843, Joe recorded, “In the forenoon I was
visited by several gentlemen, concerning the plates which were dug out
\[of\] a mound near Kinderhook. Sent by W\[illia\]m Smith to the office
for Hebrew Bible and Lexicon.” An anonymous letter published in the *New
York Herald* says, “The plates are evidently brass, and are covered on
both sides with hyerogliphics. He compared them in my presence with his
Egyptian alphabet, which he took from the plates from which the Book of
Mormon was translated, and they are evidently the same characters. He
therefore will be able to decipher them.” And the *Times and Seasons*
reported, “President Joseph has translated a portion, and says they
contain the history of the person with whom they were found; and he was
a descendant of Ham, through the loins of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and
that he received his kingdom through the ruler of heaven and earth.”

It was all a trap and Joe got suckered by this hoax and offered a
preliminary interpretation of the plates. Now, the apologists will point
out that he apparently used a Hebrew Lexicon and the Egyptian Alphabet
and Grammar, so he was translating by secular means rather than by
divine revelation. But that just pushes the problem back a step, because
where did the Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar come from? Supposedly by
revelation in 1835 when the papyri were first acquired. The reality is
that either Jo could translate unknown languages or he couldn’t. He said
he could do it and he was wrong. At best he perceived himself with
delusions of grandeur, at worst it was yet another lie to keep his
people interested and invested in the cult with living and expanding
doctrine and theology.

What I find even more fascinating about this story is that the hoaxers
didn’t reveal the fraud, because they were waiting for Joe to produce a
translation, and he never got around to it before he died. If the
Mormons had pushed him to actually produce the translation, there’s no
telling what might be contained in the resulting scripture just like the
Book of Abraham. In 1879, Wilbur Fugate finally appeared back on the
scene with an affidavit that he had colluded with the two other guys to
fabricate the plates, and explained how they did it. The great thing
about this is that the apologists *didn’t believe him*. They attacked
his character and continued to insist that the plates were authentic as
late as 1980. A chemical analysis was finally done, and the *Ensign*
magazine admitted the plates were a forgery in 1981. So much for Joe’s
gift of translation, and so much for the credibility of Mormon
apologetic “thinkers” like Hugh Nibley and his cabal of sophists. Ep
143.

Despite his flirtation with the Greek Psalter and the Kinderhoax Plates,
in Illinois Joe wrote fewer scriptures than he had earlier in his life.
Instead, he mostly couched new doctrines in his sermons and temple
rituals to smaller and smaller groups of people he knew he could trust.

At the October 1841 General Conference, Joe delivered a sermon in which
he introduced the doctrine of baptism for the dead. Joe considered
Mormon baptism to be a requirement for exaltation, so that raised the
problem of what happens to loved ones who have died without the
opportunity for Mormon baptism like Jo’s older brother, Alvin. Baptism
for the dead solved the problem by allowing a living person to be
baptized for, and in behalf of, a deceased person. The person who stands
proxy becomes a savior for their dead loved ones. Here are some quotes
from the record of this sermon in the History of the Church:

> He presented baptism for the dead as the only way that men can appear
> as saviors on Mount Zion. . . . There is a way to release the spirit
> of the dead; that is by the power and authority of the Priesthood—by
> binding and loosing on earth. This doctrine appears glorious, inasmuch
> as it exhibits the greatness of divine compassion and benevolence in
> the extent of the plan of human salvation. . . .

This gives you an idea of the direction that Joe’s theology is going.
Humans can be saviors. We have the power by the authority of the
priesthood to make decrees here on earth that God is obligated to follow
in heaven. This is a very human-centered theology. I forget, why do
other Christians consider Mormons to be anti-Christ? There was, however,
a catch after Jo had introduced the doctrine because he recognized it
could be leveraged as a tool to make the Mormons work harder on his own
pet projects.

> President Joseph Smith then announced, “There shall be no more
> baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the
> font of the Lord’s House; and the Church shall not hold another
> general conference, until they can meet in said house. *For thus saith
> the Lord\!*”

His parting words are crucial to understanding why baptisms for the dead
was used as leverage. He said we MUST perform baptisms for the dead to
get our own salvation and to provide proxy salvation, but those
baptisms, which had been done in the Mississippi River prior to this
point, could now only be performed in the House of the Lord, the Temple.
No more Necromancy for the Mormons until they finish building the
temple. No more salvation for the Mormons and no more General
Conferences until a great and spacious building is constructed. And then
he capped off this coercive screed with a “thus saith the Lord” to
really drive the point home that he wasn’t speaking as a man when he was
leveraging the salvation of the Mormons. This is how Joe motivated
people to do what he wanted: by holding their dead relatives and their
own celestial progression hostage. But no, Joseph Smith was prophet of
the restoration because it was what the lord wanted for his people in
this dispensation, it’s all part of his plan; it had absolutely nothing
to do with Jo’s own ego.

In Nauvoo Joe also introduced his temple rituals. But before we get to
that, we need to discuss Mormonism and Freemasonry, because Freemasonry
is essential context for understanding Joe’s temple rituals. Ep 100.

Freemasonry is a fraternal secret society, basically a club for dudes
that involves various myths and rituals, and oaths of loyalty and
secrecy. It was first created in about the 14th century, although it
claims to date all the way back to the time of the biblical king Solomon
and the construction of his temple. The first official American Masonic
lodge was formed in 1731 in Pennsylvania. Many of the founding fathers
were Masons as were a number of the enlightenment philosophers from whom
the founding fathers drew their inspiration. Many politicians since the
foundation of the country have been Masons or have had friends who were
Masons. Masonic lodges are a great place to meet people and share ideas
and viewpoints a person otherwise wouldn’t be exposed to. It’s also a
place to pass around the mysteries of the universe in its many forms.
Masonry is the school while fields of esoteric knowledge are the
curricula.

Joseph Smith’s father and 2 of his uncles were universalists and Masons.
With uncles Asael Smith, John Smith, and father Joseph Smith Sr. being
so wrapped up in Masonry, Universalism, and the occult, Joseph was
literally surrounded by Masons during his most formative years as a
child and teenager. Even Hyrum, Jo’s older brother, became a Mason in
New York in the 1820s and spelled his name HIRAM instead of HYRUM until
pretty late in his life, which is an homage to the central figure of the
Masonic passion narrative. That’s why we call him Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff
Smith. Then, something extremely prominent and public occurred in
Joseph’s own backyard. A guy named William Morgan wrote an expose of
Freemasonry, in which he shared some of the organization’s secrets. Some
Masons allegedly kidnapped him and probably murdered him in retaliation.
There was a huge wave of anti-Masonic sentiment in Joe’s neighborhood,
and even the formation of an anti-Masonic political party that enjoyed
some success in the next few elections. Lots of Masonic lodges shut
down, and the conspiracy theories that spread about Masonry still
reverberate in our popular culture to this day. Jo ended up marrying
William Morgan’s widow in 1838, Lucinda Pendleton Morgan, who, herself,
was a public figure in the anti-Masonry movement and enjoyed some public
notoriety for her speeches.

The Book of Mormon and Book of Moses contain language that has been
interpreted as anti-Masonic. For instance, the Book of Mormon condemns
“secret combinations,” which was a favorite phrase of the anti-Masonic
movement. And the Book of Moses describes an ancient conspiracy between
Cain and Satan in which they covenanted to “commit murder and get gain.”
Cain took the title “Master Mahan,” which evoked the Masonic title of
“Master Mason,” because Jo was the O.G. Mormon who was so good with
nicknames. However, for the rest of his career, Joe was very positive
towards Masonry. So it’s tough to reconcile the Book of Mormon’s
anti-Masonry with Joe’s interest in Masonry. D. Michael Quinn
straight-up denies that the Book of Mormon is anti-Masonic, but his is a
bit of a fringe view. Other historians think Joe was part of a reformist
movement within Masonry that affirmed true Masonry while condemning what
the reformers called “spurious Masonry.”

Whatever his reasons for writing anti-Masonry rhetoric into the Book of
Mormon, Joe later used a lot of Masonic language and symbolism in
Kirtland and Missouri and even became a Master Freemason himself in
Nauvoo. For instance, Joe’s Danite organization in Missouri seems to
have had Masonic parallels. Historian Todd Compton writes in the book
*Fire and Sword*,

> Descriptions of Danite signs and countersigns often employed Masonic
> terminology. The Masonic ideal was that a Mason in danger would make a
> Masonic sign or speak a Masonic word or phrase; then fellow Masons
> would recognize this signal and come to his aid. The Danite signs and
> passwords served exactly the same functions and were used in this way
> during the election “knock-down” at Gallatin. . . . Given Smith’s
> extensive interest in Masonry at Nauvoo, it is possible that Masonic
> aspects of Danitism are a pre-Nauvoo example of Smith’s interest in
> the Masonic ritual. . . . It should be remembered that Lucinda
> Pendleton Morgan Harris (wife of George W. Harris, a prominent member
> of the Far West High Council), was the widow of Masonic “martyr”
> William Morgan, who had published the first exposé of the Masonic
> rite. The Joseph Smith family stayed with the Harrises when they first
> arrived in Far West.

In Illinois, Joe became close friends with John C. Bennett and Lucius
Scovil, both Freemasons. In 1841, Scovil tried to get a lodge in Quincy,
Illinois to sponsor the creation of a lodge in Nauvoo. The Quincy lodge
refused. Normally you wouldn’t be able to open a lodge without
sponsorship, but the following year on March 15, 1842, Illinois Grand
Master Abraham Jonas waived the rule and granted Nauvoo a "special
dispensation" to organize. He also made Joseph Smith and his counselor,
Sidney Rigdon, "Masons at sight." He probably did this on the promise
that the Mormons would vote for him for public office. He raised Joe
directly to third or “sublime” degree of Master Mason and appointed him
“Grand Chaplain” of the lodge. Eventually about 1500 men joined the
Nauvoo lodge, compared to about 150 per lodge in the rest of Illinois.
Everything about the Nauvoo lodge was irregular, and it infuriated
Masons all over the rest of Illinois. By 1844, the number of Master
Masons in Nauvoo outnumbered the Masons in the rest of the state of
Illinois. The obvious endgame with making so many Mormon men Masons was
for political gains and elevating Nauvoo to national notoriety among
other Masons throughout the nation. With the Nauvoo Lodge so large, Jo
became one of the most powerful Masons in the nation, and he must have
absolutely delighted in that fact.

About 7 weeks after Joe received the Masonic mysteries, he introduced
the Nauvoo endowment ceremony. Historian Fawn Brodie argued on page 279
of her book *No Man Knows My History*,

> The Mormon Temple endowment ceremony is without a doubt taken from the
> Masonic ceremonies Joseph Smith participated in just weeks before he
> introduced the temple endowment. The grips, tokens, covenants, secret
> words, keys, etc. were word for word the same when first introduced.
> Members who were Masons previous to Joseph joining the fraternal order
> unashamedly referred to the Mormon endowment as "celestial masonry."

A contemporary account lends some insight into the Joseph’s mentality
behind appropriating the Masonic rituals for the temple endowment
ceremony. In a letter from Heber the Creeper Kimball to P-cubed Parley
Parker Pratt, he said the following: “Bro Joseph Ses\[says\] Masonary
was taken from preasthood but has become degen\[e\]rated. But menny
things are perfect.”

I won’t get into all the similarities, but here are just a few examples.
The main symbols of Masonry are the compass and the square. A compass
and square are also cut into the Mormon temple garment. The handshakes
are almost exactly the same as are the five points of fellowship.
Masonic initiates are given a new name, and so are Mormon initiates. The
Masonic ceremony included an oath of secrecy and a penalty sign where
you drew your thumb across your throat to indicate what would happen to
you if you spilled the fraternity’s secrets, and the Mormon endowment
used a very similar oath and penalty sign. I could go on, but the oath
and penalty are maybe the most important part, because this is the piece
of Masonry that Joe cared most about. He once declared that “the secret
of Masonry is to keep a secret.” He was trying to teach his followers to
keep his secrets, especially polygamy and world domination.

On 4 May 1842, Jo as the Highest of Priests and Master of Ceremonies,
along with his brother Hyrum, likely as the Senior Grand Warden or some
other similarly named position, gathered 9 fellow master Masons; James
Adams, Heber the Creeper Kimball, William Law, William Marks, George
Miller, White-out Willard Richards, Father Newel K. Whitney, and Bloody
Brigham Young and performed the first temple passion play. These 9 men
Jo and Hyrum initiated in the first week of May 1842 would come to be
known as The Anointed Quorum, the Holy Order, or the Holy Order of the
Anointed. This quorum was the most secretive and esoteric group Jo had
ever created in his entire ministry.

The endowment ritual involved passing through several degrees. In the
first and second degrees, the initiates were washed and anointed with
oil infused with plants and given garments to wear. In the third and
fourth degrees there was a reenactment of the Creation of the world and
the fall of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. The fifth degree
portrayed a Protestant minister conspiring with the devil to destroy
Mormonism. The sixth degree included the oaths and penalties. And in the
seventh degree, the initiates symbolically entered a room which
represented the celestial kingdom, where they’re crowned king and queen,
and taught Mormonism’s deepest mysteries such as the doctrine of
polygamy. Joe wins them over with the flattery of crowning them kings
and queens, a little sugar to make the medicine go down. Eps 108, 110,
111.

A year after he created the Holy Order and introduced the endowment
ritual, Joe also introduced another ritual called the Second Anointing.
The Second Anointing gives you guaranteed salvation. Those with the
second anointing will go to the highest level of the celestial kingdom
and get their own planet unless they shed innocent blood, that’s the
only disqualifier. Killing an innocent person was and is the only thing
which would bar these called and elected saints from the celestial
kingdom, and luckily the Church leadership designates who is and is not
innocent.

A brief note on secrecy in general. When a person like Joseph Smith with
as much social clout as he carried creates exclusive groups, it
encourages competition among his followers to prove their worth to the
prophet, and thereby gain access to the exclusive groups. There’s an
inherent coercion that takes place here and it also self-selects for
only the most loyal people to surround the prophet at any given time.
With enough years of these exclusive and secretive groups and Jo is
surrounded exclusively with people who will do whatever he says no
matter how insane or immoral. People wonder how Jo was able to get
people to coerce young girls into celestial marriage, assassinate
people, keep secret the designs of the impending Mormon revolution of
America, and so many other illegal, immoral, and outright vile
practices; the only people who were given this knowledge aspired to be
granted that information after exhibiting unyielding loyalty to the
prophet for years. In many ways, for a person like Jo, this was always
his dream; to have a group of close followers who hung on his every word
as if it came from god himself. It takes a dangerous combination of
charisma and conceit to create this human phenomena. Jo was far from the
first or last to accomplish it, but he is a spectacular example of how
these psychological mechanisms play out. Exclusivity centered around a
cult of personality, especially a religious personality, exalts the
person who leads the group to be far greater than human to the point
that he can do no wrong and anything he desires is not only the most
important thing in the world, but the very will of god. A thousand
hit-pieces could be written about him and nothing would shake the
loyalty of these dedicated brainwashed followers. \#Jo2020, amiright?

All of this temple stuff ultimately culminated in the doctrine of
exaltation, so let’s go ahead and discuss that even though we’re getting
a little ahead of ourselves in our timeline, but it fits thematically.
In 1844 Joe gave a famous sermon called the King Follett Discourse in
which he laid this doctrine out. Eps 193, 194, 195. It’s called the King
Follett Discourse because it was delivered at the funeral of a guy named
King Follett. After a lengthy and nonsensical introduction… listeners of
this show have no idea what that’s like..., Joe jumps right into it by
introducing the idea that before the world was created, a plan was laid
“in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods.”
Obviously the idea that there’s more than one god was pretty heretical
to Protestant Christians, but this had been brewing in Joe’s head for a
while. During his Hebrew studies he had picked up on the fact that the
creation story in the Bible uses the plural form of the word “God.” His
Jewish Hebrew teacher had told him this was like the royal “we,” but Joe
wasn’t buying it. He thought the creation story was teaching polytheism.
Eventually he would adopt the term Elohim to refer to god, which is the
pluralized version of the Hebrew “El,” meaning god. The Mormon god is
literally just a pluralized form of a generic term used in Hebrew to
refer to many different gods. And yes, YahWeh isn’t the only god in the
Bible. He’s just a jealous war god the Isrealites really liked because
they were bloodthirsty monsters who frequently committed genocide at
YahWeh’s command.

Next Joe asks a rhetorical question: “what kind of a being is God?” He
basically says this is the most important question religion can answer,
and I’m going to answer it for you. If I fail, then it’s my duty to
renounce all pretensions to being a prophet. But if I succeed, “let
every man and woman henceforth put their hand on their mouth and never
say any thing against the man of God again.” In other words, if you find
my teachings inspirational then you should shut up and never complain
about any of the crimes I commit or the fact that I’m raping your
daughters. Then Joe lays out his key idea:

> First, God himself, who sits enthroned in yonder heavens, is a man
> like unto one of yourselves, that is the great secret. If the vail was
> rent to-day, and the great God, who holds this world in its orbit, and
> upholds all things by his power; if you were to see him to-day, you
> would see him in all the person, image and very form as a man; for
> Adam was created in the very fashion and image of God; Adam received
> instruction, walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks
> and communes with another.

Why do other Christians consider Mormonism anti-Christ again? Maybe it’s
stuff like this about their precious eternal incorporeal modulistic
trifecta thingy who birthed himself only to kill himself to save his
creation from himself.

> . . . I am going to tell you how God came to be God. We have imagined
> that God was God from all eternity. These are incomprehensible ideas
> to some, but they are the simple and first principles of the gospel,
> to know for a certainty the character of God, that we may converse
> with him as one man with another, and that God himself; the Father of
> us all dwelt on an earth the same as Jesus Christ himself did, and I
> will show it from the Bible.

So God has a human body because he was once just a mortal man who lived
on an earth like ours, nearest the star gigolo I might add, and at some
point he *became* God. And that’s not all, because you can be a god too:

> You have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves; to be kings and
> priests to God, the same as all Gods have done; by going from a small
> degree to another, from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation,
> until you are able to sit in glory as doth those who sit enthroned in
> everlasting power. . . . \[The Bible says\] they shall be heirs of God
> and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. What is it? to inherit the same
> glory, the same power and the same exaltation, until you ascend the
> throne of eternal power the same as those who are gone before. What
> did Jesus do? why I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came
> rolling into existence. I saw my Father work out his kingdom with fear
> and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom I
> shall present it to my Father, so that he obtains kingdom upon
> kingdom, and it will exalt his glory, so that Jesus treads in his
> tracks to inherit what God did before; it is plain beyond disputation,
> and you thus learn some of the first principles of the gospel, about
> which so much hath been said.

So we are God’s heirs, and we will inherit the same glory and power that
he has. Now, Joe was not the first person to teach something like this.
This idea of becoming gods goes way back in Jewish and Christian
theology. In fact, Joe may have learned about some of this from his
Jewish friend Alexander Neibaur. Ep 155. It wasn’t a very popular idea
in nineteenth-century America, though. Most Protestants had a theology
of humility, which minimized human power in order to exalt God’s power.
Joe goes the opposite direction and minimizes God’s power in order to
exalt human power. Joe goes on in this sermon to lay out a bunch more
ideas that exalt the human, including the idea that our spirits are
self-existent, immortal, uncreated, and co-equal with God. Our spirits
have existed for all eternity, and God merely “organized” them through
celestial procreation with his harem of wives. An astronomer says we’re
all stardust, a Mormon says we’re all god ejaculate. There’s one more
quote we need to read from this sermon, from Joe’s concluding paragraph:

> I have intended my remarks to all; both rich and poor, bond and free,
> great and small. I have no enmity against any man. I love you all. I
> am your best friend, and if persons miss their mark, it is their own
> fault. If I reprove a man and he hates me, he is a fool, for I love
> all men, especially these my brethren and sisters. I rejoice in
> bearing the testimony of my aged friends. You never knew my heart; no
> man knows my history; I cannot tell it. I shall never undertake it; if
> I had not experienced what I have, I should not have known it myself.
> I never did harm any man since I have been born in the world. My voice
> is always for peace, I cannot lie down until all my work is finished.
> I never think any evil, nor any thing to the harm of my fellow man.—
> When I am called at the trump of the ark-angel, and weighed in the
> balance you will all know me then… God bless you all. Amen.

I, Joseph Smith, am perfect and wouldn’t harm a fly; I’m full of love
and never think any evil, and my history is too vast and great to be
encompassed in words. Well, last week’s episode was all about Joe’s
wrath against his enemies, so you’ll have to forgive me if I don’t buy
into Joe’s boasting and outright lies here about what a great and
peaceful and loving guy he was. Just a few weeks before this he
published a letter in the Times and Seasons titled “A Friendly Hint to
Missouri,” threatening them as the first place the great Mormon militia
would begin its military campaign to burn across the nation and
overthrow the government. Ep 185. Jo even sent a letter to a private
revolutionary war militia known as the Green Mountain Boys asking for
help with this campaign. Ep 181. How he wrapped the King Follett
Discourse taps into something we’ll get into at the end of today’s
episode, the question of why he is such a fascinating and enigmatic
figure to study. No man knows his history, but yet millions are taught
it and thousands try to truly understand it. Why? More on that later.

Joe boasted a lot during the Nauvoo years. For instance, on July 29,
1842, after once again successfully evading state authorities’ attempts
to arrest him, Joe got up on the stand and preached a sermon. Here’s his
account of the sermon in History of the Church 5:136:

> I arose and congratulated the brethren and sisters on the victory I
> had once more gained over the Missourians. I had told them formerly
> about fighting the Missourians, and about fighting alone. I had not
> fought them with the sword, or by carnal weapons; I had done it by
> stratagem, by outwitting them, and there had been no lives lost, and
> there would be no lives lost if they would hearken to my counsel.
> \[(yeah, that worked so well for the Mormons in Missouri\!)\] Up to
> this day God had given me wisdom to save the people who took counsel.
> None had ever been killed who abode by my counsel. At Hauns’ Mill the
> brethren went contrary to my counsel, if they had not, their lives
> would have been spared. I had been in Nauvoo all the while, and
> outwitted Bennett’s associates, and attended to my own business in the
> city all the time. We want to whip the world mentally and they will
> whip themselves physically. . . . Orson Pratt has attempted to destroy
> himself and caused all the city almost to go in search of him. . . .
> O. Pratt and others of the same class caused trouble by telling
> stories to people who would betray me, and they must believe those
> stories because his Wife told him so\! \[(RIP Sarah Pratt; you never
> deserved this)\] I will live to trample on their ashes with the soles
> of my feet. . . . If oppression comes I will then show them that there
> is a Moses and a Joshua amongst us; and I will fight them, if they
> don’t take off oppression from me. I will do as I have done this
> time, I will run into the woods, I will fight them in my own way.

I mean, the idea that he had outwitted the Missourians during the 1838
Mormon War was pretty delusional, but the propaganda was so deeply
ingrained in the collective Mormon mindset that they probably cheered
when he said it. The claim that no lives were lost except for the people
at Haun’s Mill was inaccurate. The boasting about being a “Joshua” when
he had escaped arrest by hiding in the woods was just hilarious; yeah,
Jo bravely fled into a corn patch. And the part where he makes fun of
Apostle Orson Pratt for having been driven to a suicide attempt by Joe’s
bad behavior? Seriously? By the way, Orson Pratt was sitting on the
stand when Joe said all of this. The whole crowd was looking at Pratt as
Joe made fun of his thoughts of suicide and called him a Judas and said
he would trample on his ashes. Frankly, it seems like Joe *wanted* Orson
Pratt to commit suicide, and he was trying to drive him to it. Maybe
that would finally drive Sarah to the desperate ends of joining Jo’s
harem. Eps 134, 138. The people in the crowd fed off this propaganda;
these lies. Anybody sickened by how dishonest this had long since left
the church. For everybody who remained, this was red meat to a
bloodthirsty hoard of rabid animals ready to goose step behind their
revolutionary supreme leader.

Here’s another “fun” one. On December 29, 1842, Joe was on his way to
Springfield, Illinois. He tried to stop for the night at a tavern in the
town of Paris, but the tavern-owner said the people of Paris had heard
the Mormons were bad people, and had made a compact not to shelter them.
Joe brags in History of the Church 5:211 about how he bullied the tavern
keeper into letting him stay:

> I said to him, \[“\]we will stay, but no thanks to you. I have men
> enough to take the town, and if we must freeze, we will freeze by the
> burning of these houses.\[“\] The taverns were then opened, and we
> were accommodated, and received many apologies in the morning.

Not only was the prophet the kind of person who would threaten to burn
down your house to keep himself warm, but he was also the kind of person
who thought it was cool to brag about it in his history after the
Mormons had done that very thing not 5 years earlier.

Here’s another one. In 1843 when Joe sent his henchman Joseph H. Jackson
to murder Missouri Governor Lilburn W. Boggs and to break Porter
Rockwell out of prison after Port botched the assassination; Jackson
returned having failed in both missions. Eps 144, 147. He went to Joe’s
house and made his excuses, and Joe prophesied that Pistol Packin’
Porter would come home safely eventually. Then they had the following
homoerotic conversation, as reported by Jackson:

> Silence ensued for a few minutes, when Joe suddenly looked me full in
> the eye, and after gazing steadily for a few moments said. "Jackson
> you are the first man that I have ever met that I could not look
> down." Said I, "do you like a bold eye?" He replied that he did and
> then commenced a panegyric on himself. He said that he was a good and
> godly man, and that he had never known wrong in his life, for in all
> his acts, he was guided and protected by the power of the Holy Ghost
> -- that the Missourians had tried to kill him, but rifle balls could
> have no effect on him, for he had been shot at thirteen times in
> Missouri, and the balls bounded back as hail from the side of a house;
> and for this reason he knew the Holy Ghost was with him, and that he
> truly was the greatest man on the earth.

According to Jackson, Jo considered himself literally invincible, able
to take every ball the Missourians could shoot at him without flinching.
In due time, we’ll put that claim to the test.

In the conversation, Jo did some more bragging after his enforcers known
as the “Destroying Angels” freed him from the custody of Sheriff Harmon
T. Wilson and Joseph Reynolds, who arrested him in June 1843 in Dixon,
Illinois.The Destroying Angels took the sheriffs into custody, and then
added insult to injury by having them formally arrested for kidnapping
by a Hancock County sheriff and forcing them to give up their guns. Then
Joe made a triumphal entry into Nauvoo in his full regalia, like some
kind of bargain bin warlord. Eps 144, 145. A Nauvoo court held a habeas
corpus hearing for Joe, in which Joe’s lawyer made some completely
asinine arguments, including the claim that the warrant was for a Joseph
Smith Jr., but Joe had a son by the same name and thus went by Joseph
Smith Sr., and therefore couldn’t be the same Joseph Smith named in the
warrant. Ep 146, 147. That was actually one of his arguments. Joe went
by Joseph Smith Jr. his whole life, and now he decides he wants to be
called Joseph Smith Sr. when it was legally advantageous? The court
remanded Joe into the custody of Nauvoo marshal Henry G. Sherwood, and
Sherwood let him go. After this victory, Joe gave a sermon to brag about
it with a bit more homoeroticism mixed into his scatterbrained rant.

> I am well—I am hearty. I hardly know how to express my feelings—I feel
> strong as a giant. . . . I pulled sticks with the men coming along,
> and I pulled up with one hand the strongest man that could be found:
> then two men tried, but they could not pull me up, and I continued to
> pull mentally until I pulled Missouri to Nauvoo. But I will pass from
> that subject. . . . Relative to our city charter, courts, right of
> habeas corpus, . . . I wish you to know and publish that we have all
> power; and if any man from this time forth says anything to the
> contrary, cast it into his teeth\[\!\] . . . I have dragged these men
> here by my hand, and will do it again; but I swear I will not deal so
> mildly with them again; for the time has come when *forbearance is no
> longer a virtue*: and if you or I are again taken unlawfully, you are
> at liberty to give loose to blood and thunder. . . . But before I will
> bear this unhallowed persecution any longer—before I will be dragged
> away again, among my enemies, for trial, *I will spill the last drop
> of blood in my veins, and will see all my enemies* IN HELL\!

So Joe basically says, “I am the tug of war champion of the world, and I
have beaten the whole state of Missouri at tug-of-war, and we are all
powerful\!” Huzzah\! “And the next time I beat them in tug-of-war will
be the last, because we’ll kill the bastards\!” Huzzah\! Classic Joe
Smith. I can’t wait to test that prophecy at the end.

One of Joe’s better boasts was on May 26, 1844, when he knew the
publication of the *Nauvoo Expositor* was about to ignite a blaze
throughout the city; this screed was aimed right at the Fosters,
Higbees, Laws, and Joseph H. Jackson. If you log into the Utah
Lighthouse Ministries website, this quote is featured on the front page
to… I guess… prove how anti-Christ Joseph Smith was and own the Morms. I
think it’s funny but this stuff is really important to religious folk
and people who call themselves “true Christians”. I will, however, agree
with those folks when they say the modern church is everything contrary
to the values in the Book of Mormon and Jesus’ teachings. Jesus was a
socialist and Mormonism is the wealthiest religion in the world. Great
and spacious buildings are unequivocally evil but Mormonism has
140-something temples, thousands of chapels, and owns all the largest
buildings in Utah. Jesus threw the money changers out of the temple but
Mormons buy garments in their great and spacious temples. Jesus hung out
with people who get excommunicated from the church. Charity never
faileth yet the modern church gives less than 1/10th of 1% of their
income to humanitarian aid. Don’t pray in your closet, pray before every
meal, public gathering, with your family before bed and after waking up,
and before every church function and scout or young women’s camp like
some kind of nervous tick. Don’t argue with the Pharisees, invite them
to a nice dinner after they arrive on your private jet and ask them to
pass a bill or tax cut for you. They have enough money to solve world
hunger during a global pandemic but the rainy-day fund keeps growing as
the government keeps shoveling money out to religions and corporations,
leaving tens of millions unemployed without savings to fend for
themselves. My overall point, claim whatever you want to be your
scriptures, but at least follow them to the extent laws allow. You can’t
call the menu at Fat Shack your scriptures and then lobby government to
pass laws forcing everybody to be vegetarian. You can’t be a virgin Kama
Sutra expert. You can’t teach the pride cycle to millions of people
while so clearly teetering on the edge before the fall. You don’t get to
preach racial tolerance and harmony while your god says dark skin is a
curse on the lazy and unrighteous fencesitters to make them less
appealing to his righteous white-skinned chosen people. What does it say
about a person or institution that so quickly discards its claimed words
of god when they can make a dollar doing so? Point made, let’s get to
some of Jo’s final words from late May 1844, barely a month before he
died in the Carthage gunfight.

> I,… have been in perils, and oftener than anyone in this generation;
> as Paul boasted, I have suffered more than Paul did. I should be like
> a fish out of water if I were out of persecution; perhaps my brethren
> think it requires all this to keep me humble. The Lord has constituted
> me so curiously that I glory in persecution; I am not near so humble
> as if I was not persecuted. If oppression will make a wise man mad,
> much more a fool. If they want a beardless boy to whip all the world,
> I will get on the top of a mountain and crow like a rooster; I shall
> always beat them… Come on ye prosecutors, ye false swearers; all hell
> boil over; ye burning mountains roll down your lava; for I will come
> out on the top at last. I have more to boast of than ever any man had;
> I am the only man that ever has been able to keep a whole church
> together since the days of Adam; a large majority of the whole have
> stood by me: neither Paul, John, Peter, nor Jesus ever did it. I boast
> that no man ever did such a work as me; the followers of Jesus ran
> away from him; the Latter Day Saints never ran away from me yet.

So Joe considered himself a greater man than Jesus Christ, and how can
you argue with that? After all, Jesus wasn’t able to keep a church
together, whereas Joe had kept a Church together for fourteen years...
with just, I don’t know, maybe a major schism every two years or so
where some portion of the Latter Day Saints did, indeed, run away from
him or chase him out of town at the point of a bayonet and pitchfork.

But Joe’s braggadocio isn’t really the greatest sign of his arrogance.
Boasting about perceived accomplishments is one thing, but the greatest
sign of his arrogance surrounds his greatest ambitions. He basically
made plans to overthrow all national governments and take over the world
with himself at the head of his new world Mormon government. Ep 214.
Here’s how Joseph H. Jackson explains Jo’s plans while Jo was running
for President in 1844:

> There was a Mr. Brown, formerly of Rushville, with whom I became
> acquainted in Nauvoo, soon after my arrival there. This man has a
> wonderful genius for invention, and has planned a sub-marine battery
> and steam fire ship, which, to all appearance, is capable of great
> execution. He stated to me, that he had been operating for 21 years,
> in perfecting this work, but had not the means to bring the matter
> before the nation, and that Joe made him a propusition, which had
> caused him to remove to Nauvoo. This proposition was, to furnish the
> means to take him, together with G. A. Adams and Orson Hyde, to
> Russia, where the invention would be laid before the Emperor; and as
> Joe had great faith in its success, he expected a large sum for the
> secret, Which Brown and Joe were to divide. This was palmed off on
> Brown, but was far from being Joe's real object. His real object, as
> he disclosed it to me, was this: He would first run for President, and
> thus be able to prove to the Emperor of Russia his strength in the
> Union. He would then send G. A. Adams, Orson Hyde, and Brown to
> Russia, and after the utility of the invention had been fairly proved
> to the Emperor, Joe's proposition to him was to be submitted: which
> was to form a league for the overthrow of the powers that be. Now this
> may seem too ridiculous for any man to imagine possible; nevertheless,
> no one acquainted with the excessive vanity of Joe Smith, will doubt
> but that he in reality believed that he could form even so
> preposterous a union.

What is it with narcissistic presidential candidates looking for help
from Russia? Anyway, Jackson’s account of Joe’s intentions is basically
confirmed by the Minutes of the Council of Fifty, which the LDS Church
recently released as part of the Joseph Smith Papers Project. The
Council of Fifty was to be the government of the kingdom of God, under
Joseph Smith as king and president. The minute book itself is titled
“Record of the Council of Fifty or Kingdom of God.” The official,
revealed name of the Council of Fifty is “The Kingdom of God and His
Laws with the Keys and Power\[s\] thereof, and Judgment in the Hands of
His Servants, Ahman Christ.” Eps 168, 169, 170.

Jo always wanted to be king of a world that looked to him as sole
governmental and religious authority. He aspired to become a Moses, a
Mohammed, a religious prophet warlord that subjugated the American
people under his arm of power only to then extend his campaign to the
rest of the world. The Council of Fifty is how he planned on doing it. I
can’t stress enough how important the Council of Fifty is. William
Clayton, who kept the Council of Fifty’s minute book, believed the
council replicated “the Grand Council amongst the Gods when the
organization of this world was contemplated.” Lyman Wight called it
“Grand Council of God,” and “Grand Council of Heaven,” and John D. Lee
called it “councils of the Gods,” which was fitting with Mormon theology
because all these dudes believed they were actually on the path toward
godhood and why wait for death for such a noble position? It was also
sometimes called the “Living Constitution,” because the authority of the
“living” men who comprised the council trumped the authority of any
“dead” document such as the US Constitution. From its infancy,
Mormonism has been a revolutionary religion; that isn’t a badge of
honor, it’s a declaration of misanthropy and elitist lawlessness. Ep
214.

Before the first meeting of the Council of Fifty got under way on March
11, 1844, Elder Lucian Woodworth moved that “every member of it to be
bound to eternal secrecy as to what passed here, not to have the
privilege of telling anything which might be talked of to any person
even to our wives, and the man who broke the rule ‘should lose his
cursed head.’” The motion passed unanimously. Then Joe laid out an
agenda for the council, which included rewriting the US Constitution,
forming alliances with the Indians, and forming an alliance with Sam
Houston in New Mexico. The agenda also included searching for a place
out West for the Mormons to settle. “All seemed agreed to look to some
place where we can go and establish a Theocracy either in Texas or
Oregon or somewhere in California \&c.” And that was just the first
meeting. Eps 185, 189.

A week later, on March 19, 1844, Hyrum Smith made a speech in the
council in which he said “that the time was at hand when the prophecies
should be fulfilled, when the nations were ready to embrace the gospel
and when the ensign should be lift up and the standard to the people and
he believed if we will set up the standard and raise the ensign the
honest in heart of all nations will immediately begin to flock to the
standard of our God.” John Taylor got up next and “referred especially
to the United States\[,\] England, Ireland, Scotland, France, Poland,
Switzerland, Germany \&c… concerning the situation of the different
nations of the earth showing that they were ripe to receive the truth.”
At this meeting the council “Resolved that a “communication be made
immediately to the General Government through our representative, Mr
\[John\] Wentworth, specifying that General Joseph Smith will protect
the Texas and Oregon from all foreign invasion if the General Government
will authorise him to raise volunteers in the United States for that
purpose.” Yes, I’m sure their intentions in wanting to raise an army
were purely for the defense of the US. At a later meeting, on April 11,
1844, “President Joseph was voted our P\[rophet\] P\[riest\] and
K\[ing\] with loud Hosannas.” Two days after that, Joe “prophecied the
entire overthrow of this nation in a few years.” Where do apostates and
non-believers exist in this Mormon theocracy? I’m reminded of the 1000
years of probation after the second coming which will be the era where
Jesus reigns supreme and every knee shall bow and every tongue confess
the gospel is the way, the truth, and the light. How will billions of
people be taught the gospel? Reeducation prison camps of course; those
who don’t convert are given to the buffetings of Satan; they are the
salt who hath lost its savor, to be cast out and trodden under foot. You
think a Mormon theocracy would be tolerant of any other religions or
non-religious folk like yours truly? Or would we be the Labans of the
world?

There were three non-Mormon members on the Council of Fifty, all of them
really interesting. Marinus G. Eaton and Edward Bonney were both
counterfeiters, as we discussed earlier in this series. Eaton
specifically was a family friend of the Smiths from the New York era.
The third was Uriah Brown. He was the inventor described by Joseph H.
Jackson, the guy who Jackson said had invented a submarine. Jackson
undersold it. Uriah Brown didn’t just have plans to build a submarine,
but also an “invention of liquid fire to destroy an army or navy.”
Clearly Joe wanted these flamethrowing submarines badly enough to let
their non-Mormon inventor sit on this highly-secretive and revolutionary
council.

The Council of Fifty Minutes recorded by Quilliam Claypen were
plutonium, and Joe knew it. When he gave himself up for arrest and was
taken to Carthage prior to the shootout, he whispered to Quilliam and
“told me either to put the r\[ecords\] of K\[ingdom\] into the hands
of some faithful man and send them away, or burn them, or bury them. I
concluded to bury them, which I did immediately on my return home.” 7
days after Joe was killed, Quilliam dug them up. They had been damaged
by water, but he reconstructed them, which is why we can benefit from
reading them today. Oddly enough, the church historians redact documents
that relate to temple work and sealings, but this overtly anti-American
anti-human document is completely unredacted and transcribed for anybody
to read at their pleasure. I encourage you to do so or listen to any
episodes where we discuss the Council of Fifty. Eps 159, 163, 168, 169,
170, 189, 197, 198, 199, 201, 204, 213, 214.

Before Joe went to his death, he couldn’t resist one last defiant boast
against his enemies. With Nauvoo under martial law and the Nauvoo Legion
mustered in full regalia to defend the city, Joseph made his last public
address as first prophet of the Mormons, which is recorded in the
History of the Church and captured in a painting from the 1880s we’ve
discussed a few times. He began by warning the Saints that their enemies
didn’t want just his blood; they wanted the blood of all Mormons. The
enemies are at the gates, only complete and total cohesion behind your
prophet will save you. Then he laid out the case for Mormon innocence
he’d attempt to make in letter form to Governor Ford who dismantled
each argument in totality:

> I call God, angels and all men to witness that we are innocent of the
> charges which are heralded forth through the public prints against us
> by our enemies; and while they assemble together in unlawful mobs to
> take away our rights and destroy our lives, they think to shield
> themselves under the refuge of lies which they have thus wickedly
> fabricated.

He then called upon his followers to fight alongside him.

> Will you all stand by me to the death, and sustain at the peril of
> your lives the laws of our country, and the liberties and privileges
> which our fathers have transmitted unto us, sealed with their sacred
> blood? (\[“\]Aye,\[“\] shouted thousands.) He then said “it is well,
> if you had not done it I would have gone out there (pointing to the
> west) and would have raised up a mightier people.\[“\] . . . (Drawing
> his sword and presenting it to heaven he said)—I call God and angels
> to witness, that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and
> unalterable determination that this people shall have their legal
> rights, and be protected from mob violence, or my blood shall be spilt
> upon the ground like water, and my body consigned to the silent tomb.
> While I live I will never tamely submit to the dominion of cursed
> mobocracy; I would welcome death rather than submit to this
> oppression, and it would be sweet—oh, sweet to rest in the grave
> rather than submit to this oppression, agitation, annoyance,
> confusion, and alarm upon alarm any longer. . . . I do not regard my
> own life; I am ready to be offered a sacrifice for this people, for
> what can our enemies do? Only kill the body and their power is then at
> an end. Stand firm, my friends; never flinch; Do not seek to save your
> lives; for he that is afraid to die for the truth will lose eternal
> life.

Why do we study Joseph Smith? What makes his legacy and story so
enigmatic and appealing? What makes a charismatic figure just that, a
charismatic figure? I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about this and I
don’t think I’ll ever figure it out. Jo refused to be a footprint in the
sand. He took great pains to ensure he’d be spoken of for good and evil
for generations to come. There’s something raw and human about his story
that compels us to pay attention. Love him or hate him, we can’t look
away from the prophet.

We’re attracted to people who are confident, especially to a fault. A
person like this with absolutely no altruistic, or even redeeming,
qualities can overcome any amount of negativity, internal or external,
with enough hubris. A thousand hit pieces can be written about a public
figure like this and their many exploits of inhumanity. People called
him a modern Mahomet in a derogatory way, yet he took pride in it.
People called him a heaven-daring wretch and he went on to fabricate
theology other Christians consider absolute heresy. He flaunted the law
and when people attempted to make him accountable he exclaimed they were
denying his rights as an American citizen. We see figures so filled with
brazen and unashamed confidence like Jo and we think… they must be doing
something right to be so successful. We see survival benefits to these
figures and attach ourselves to them in hopes that we’ll enjoy some
fraction of the prosperity they have.

To bring this to a sharper point and capture the overall thesis of
today’s show; Joseph Smith did a lot. He had a lot of accomplishments
for which he was proud. Many of those accomplishments required flaunting
laws, acquiring property and wealth from his followers, incurring debt
he never intended on repaying, theft, secret combinations with death
oaths for revealing those secrets, assassination squads, committing
treason against the nation which granted him the liberties to form his
own religion, commodifying women and sexuality to an even greater extent
than the culture in which he lived; all of that is to say he was a bad
guy, but he was an ambitious and successful bad guy. He was a bad guy
who accomplished so much and bragged every step of the way. That
arrogance, that conceit, and his inability to ever admit fault, is many
ways is a key to the guy’s charisma and appeal. We love to hate people
we don’t understand, especially when they revel in the fact that we can
never know their history.

Just because a person is proud of their achievements or boasts about
what they’ve accomplished, doesn’t say much about who they are or their
character. It’s what those achievements and accomplishments are to begin
with that says much more about who that person is. Jo boasted of his
ability to lead a cult with no remorse and the least amount of real work
necessary. He boasted about flaunting laws and never being held
accountable. He boasted about raising armies and committing treason. He
boasted about knowing unknown languages in the face of being repeatedly
proven wrong. He boasted about the thousands of people who risked life
and limb to follow him and all the suffering he forced upon them. He
boasted about hiding his teenage consorts from his first wife, Emma.
It’s not the boasting itself, but what the boasting is about that’s at
issue.

To quote a conversation Jackson had with Jo:

> He continued to talk about his wife until my anger got the better of
> my prudence, and I then told him, he must stop such conversation to
> me, and that I would not hear him rail out on so worthy a woman as I
> believed Emma to be, and threatened to knock him down if he did not
> cease. I told him he was a d--d rascal, and he thought every other man
> as black-hearted as himself. At the same time I accused him of living
> in fornication with other women, and that he especially should hold
> his peace in regard to Emma. To these aspersions he made no angry
> retort, but would not at that time own that he lived in fornication
> with other women, and said he was a godly man in every act, but that
> Emma was jealous of him. He then asked me if I had ever known him to
> do anything wrong with the women. I replied that I had not, but that
> in my opinion any man that was base enough to concoct schemes for
> pillage and murder as he had done, would lie with his mother if she
> would permit him.

I’m proud of the six years of serialized podcasting it’s taken us to get
here. I hope you’re ready listeners, the time is nigh at hand to finally
bury this motherfucker.
