---
layout: post
title: 'Ep 199 - Lawful Dissent'
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-199-lawful-dissent/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-199-lawful-dissent
category: History
date: 2020-03-20 16:45:52 +0000
---

Ep 199 -- Lawful Dissent

On this episode, we discuss the Law family. William, his wife Jane, and
his brother Wilson, converted to the church in the mid-1830s and moved
to the burgeoning city of Nauvoo in 1839. From that point forward,
William and Jane were elevated to high-ranking levels of Mormon and city
leadership. Joseph Smith and William Law became good friends and
coworkers in Nauvoo government and military duties. But, something
changed. By late 1843, William began to bristle about how much political
influence Joseph Smith was gaining. By January of 1844, William was
dropped from the Presidency of the church (Jo's left-hand man). William,
Jane, and Wilson Law eventually became looped together with the
dissenter movement within the kingdom. They finally chose to act and
formed their own sect of Mormonism in Nauvoo, collected affidavits of
those wronged by the Nauvoo leadership and Joseph Smith, and established
an adversarial printing press. The Higbees, the Fosters, and the Laws
establishing this rival church and expose printing press would catalyze
a sequence of events which would lead to the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum
Smith.

Links:

History of Hancock County by Thomas Gregg\
<https://archive.org/details/historyofhancock00greg/page/296>

History of Illinois by Thomas Ford\
<https://archive.org/details/ahistoryillinoi00shiegoog/page/n318>

William Law Biography\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/william-law>

Wilson Law Biography\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/person/wilson-law>

JS Reflections and Blessings\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/reflections-and-blessings-16-and-23-august-1842/2>

An Interview with William Law\
<http://www.mrm.org/law-interview>

William Law, Nauvoo Dissenter by Lyndon Cook\
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/43040880?seq=18#metadata_info_tab_contents>

JS 1844 journal\
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/1#full-transcript>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)\
Twitter [\@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)\
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>\
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>\
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>\
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>\
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

The Higbees, the Fosters, and the Laws in May of 1844. Are you in the
know, dear listener? Do you understand the gravity of what we're talking
about yet? Hopefully it'll be clear by the end of today's episode. Next
episode is the big number 200 and we've got an exciting topic to
discuss. But, first, we have to discuss the final pillar of our trio of
insurrection, the Laws.

We've discussed the Fosters and the Higbees the last two episodes, but
the Laws are certainly the most important of the trio to cover before
next week so I saved them for last. We've talked about William and Jane
Law, as well as William's brother Wilson, on the podcast before. Back on
episode 163 Live and Die by the Law we discussed them extensively and
even got a bit into the controversy that caused them to diverge from the
prophet. Today, however, we're going to really get into the nitty gritty
of what happened and how the Laws came to be the tip of the dissent
spear which crippled the prophet and brought an end to his reign in
1844.

First, a little review of the background for the Law family. William and
Wilson Law immigrated to Pennsylvania from their homeland of Ireland
sometime before 1820 with their parents, Richard Law and Ann Hunter. The
Law family moved to today's Ontario Canada by 1833. Here is where
William Law met Jane Silverthorn and they were married in June of 1833.
William was 24 years old, Wilson was 27 and remained unmarried until the
1840s. William and Jane, as well as Wilson Law, all converted to the
church in 1837 when it was in turmoil during the late Kirtland era of
the church. The Laws, however, did not immigrate to Kirtland or even
Missouri after Jo and the Quorum of Apostles were removed from Kirtland
leadership and moved the church headquarters to Missouri. During this
time, William Law was presiding elder of the Churchville branch of the
church; his duties and time were occupied with leadership in Canada. The
Laws remained in Canada for the entire Missouri-Mormon War of 1838.

Once the leadership had escaped from Liberty Jail and the Mormons were
beginning to settle in Illinois, the Laws pulled the trigger and decided
to move to Commerce, soon to become Nauvoo. This move was the result of
a consolidation effort the leadership was making to bring as many people
to Nauvoo as possible. Previous revelations had been given to spread out
and diversify the church among different localities. But, Jo had learned
an important lesson when he was forced to excommunicate the Missouri
leadership to retain control in early 1838. When the people are all
grouped together, it's much easier to keep an eye on everybody and keep
them under the thumb of the leadership of the One True Prophet.

In accordance with the consolidation efforts of the church, the laws
moved to Commerce in late 1839. The Mormons began resettling and Joseph
collected affidavits from hundreds of Mormons about their experience in
Missouri. He took that folder of documents and presented it to congress
and President Martin Van Buren. During his trip to D.C., this was the
first time Joseph Smith and William Law set eyes on each other. While
the Laws were headed west to Illinois and the Prophet's posse east
toward D.C., they met near Springfield and tarried there a few days.
Here, Joseph and William Law cultivated the beginnings of a friendship
which would eventually lead to William Law being called as second
Counselor to the Prophet once Frederick G. Williams died and Hyrum had
become Patriarch of the church to replace the deceased Joseph Sr., Big
Daddy Cheese.

William Law showed great promise in the church upon his arrival to
Commerce. His older brother, Wilson, tended to be a little less
involved. Accordingly, the monumental revelation which became D&C 124
was produced in conjunction with the passage of the Nauvoo Charter by
John C. Wreck-it Bennett. We've talked about D&C 124 a lot but it was
the religious component of establishing Nauvoo while the Charter being
passed was the secular component. D&C 124 being published when Nauvoo
was officially recognized as a city ensured a constant and indivisible
intermingling of church and municipal authority. William Law is named
repeatedly in the revelation. Verse 82 commanded William Law by name to
purchase stock in the Nauvoo House Association, which we've also
discussed extensively, but was basically what Jo conceived of to become
the Mormon Ritz in Nauvoo. 15 verses later reads as follows:

> Let my servant William Law also receive the keys by which he may ask
> and receive blessings; let him be humble before me, and be without
> guile, and he shall receive of my Spirit, even the Comforter, which
> shall manifest unto him the truth of all things, and shall give him,
> in the very hour, what he shall say.

And later it reads in verse 107:

> Let him assist my servant Joseph, and also let my servant William Law
> assist my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto the
> kings of the earth, even as I have before said unto you.

Finally, in verse 126, William Law was called to an important office:

> I give unto him \[Joseph\] for counselors my servant Sidney Rigdon and
> my servant William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and First
> Presidency, to receive the oracles for the whole church.

This placed William Law on a level of church authority equivalent with
Hingepin Sidney Rigdon. The dude was in as exclusive of circles as he
could be during the earliest days of Nauvoo being Nauvoo instead of
Commerce.

William Law was also responsible for one of the public works projects in
Nauvoo that was actually completed. He was put in charge of the grain
and sawmill built in the city, which made him quite wealthy. What is
interesting about this grain and sawmill is that it was initially slated
to be driven by water power when the canal project was completed. This
canal project would have diverted a small amount of water from the
Mississippi through the center of Nauvoo's mercantile district, thus
providing endless sources of power for the planned factories that would
be built. However, the canal project was conceived and agreed upon, but
never got more than a few dozen feet dug before the whole project was
abandoned. Instead, a steam-powered motor was purchased and brought to
Nauvoo and was hooked up to the grain and sawmill so the Mormons could
cut their trees into boards and grind their grain into flour. This grain
and sawmill project was conceived in early 1841, but wasn't tabled for
completion until early 1842 where Jo's Nauvoo journal records that on
Monday, January 24, Jo met with William Law to inspect the lots
designated for the mill. On that same day, Jo and Emma signed a deed to
William Law for \$700 for the said lots and the land was officially
transferred to William Law with Jo's younger brother, Samuel H. Smith,
acting as Justice of the Peace to notarize the signatures.

William Law was also called as Registrar of the University of Nauvoo.
The University of Nauvoo was sanctioned by the Nauvoo Charter, but was
never formally created beyond forming a basic curriculum with a few
standard textbooks. Whatever the intention of the University of Nauvoo
was at inception, the benefits reaped from its existence amounted to
granting honorary degrees to people who did favors for the Mormons. Law
was the guy who handled the student records of the University. He alone
approved people joining the University and their records while they were
students. So, if a guy like James Gordon Bennett was printing some great
articles about the Mormons in his paper, the New York Herald, William
Law was the guy who accepted and processed the paperwork that gave James
Bennett his honorary juris doctorate degree, even though the dude never
went through law school, much less through the University of Nauvoo's
law school program, which it didn't even have. This granted Law the
ability to scratch the back of anybody who corruptly scratched the
collective back of the Mormons, and the powers were exercised in a few
notable cases like James Bennett's.

William Law was also appointed to a criminal justice committee that was
formed in October of 1840 as a result of the General Conference that
first Sunday. As was required by the Nauvoo Charter, every act or
ordinance passed in the city had to be published in the city newspaper
immediately before it could take effect. The leadership bent this rule
from time to time, but for the most part they stuck with it.
Accordingly, printed in the first October of 1840 periodical of the
Times and Season, we find the minutes from the conference which includes
this:

> The president \[Joseph Smith\] arose and stated that there had been
> several depredations committed on the citizens of Nauvoo, and thought
> it expedient that a committee be appointed, to search out the
> offenders, and bring them to justice.
>
> Whereupon it was resolved, that, Joseph Smith, William Marks, Elias
> Higbee, Vinson Knight, Charles C. Rich, Dimick Huntington, \[and\]
> William Law compose said committee.

This committee was formed when the general topic of discussion during
the conference was criminal justice. In the same meeting John C.
Wreck-it Bennett spoke on the necessity of the brethren to "stand by
each other and resist every unlawful attempt at persecution." Bennett
also added later in the same meeting that "many persons had been accused
of crime, and had been looked upon as guilty, when on investigation it
has been ascertained that nothing could be adduced against them,".
Criminality in Nauvoo was a constant issue that could never be
controlled, but Bennett attempted to instate some form of checks and
balances with the criminal underground in Nauvoo by proposing a motion;
"it was resolved that no person be considered guilty of crime, unless
proved so by the testimony of two or three witnesses."

What this resulted in was a conflict for William Law. What I mean by
that is he was generally a good person and regarded in his life after
Mormonism as a moral guy. However, the Nauvoo criminal justice system
covered up a lot of crime. We've talked a lot on this show about how
witnesses could be produced to reach all sorts of outcomes which were
beneficial to the leadership of the church. William Law saw first-person
how the Nauvoo Municipal court devolved into a banana republic court
system to protect those in power and allow crime to propagate
unmitigated. When it came to squashing dissent, the High Council and
ecclesiastical punishment coupled with the Nauvoo Municipal system
allowed for complete and total character assassination. We saw it last
week with Chauncey Higbee when he was caught up in the Bennett expose
scandal and was punished by the High Council and brought into the Nauvoo
Court for adultery charges. William Law was present as a member of the
criminal justice committee formed in Nauvoo. To what extent he approved
of these tyrannical powers or he just remained silent is a matter of
mystery Law took with him to the grave.

However, he did show signs of dissent starting to grow resulting from
the polygamy. All evidence leads historians to conclude that William and
Jane Law were die-hard monogamists. So, when Bennett began collecting
data about polygamy, it caused the Laws to ideologically divorce
themselves from the inner circles of church leadership that was trending
toward polygamy. Publicly, however, William Law made numerous statements
defending Joseph against the allegations Bennett made and even embarked
on a mission to the Eastern States to set issues in order and preach the
propaganda the church leadership had contrived to damage control the
Bennett Meltdown.

It can't be overstated how divisive of an issue polygamy was in Nauvoo.
Joseph Smith pushed his two closest counselors away as a result of
polygamy. When he made a mark of Sidney Rigdon's daughter, Nancy, and
when he attempted to prey on William's wife, Jo turned them both into
enemies. Rigdon and Jo reconciled; the Laws and Jo, however, did not,
and the chasm between them grew from mid-1843 to early 1844.

Mid-1842 and the Bennett meltdown seem to be where William and Wilson
Law sort of diverged. Wilson Law grew further away from the church than
William. I believe William Law wanted to believe the allegations made by
John Bennett were false. It's worth taking stock of why he harbored that
cognitive dissonance. Everything the Laws had in life, including all
their social connections and personal wealth, was tied up in Nauvoo. I
think they sincerely believed they were following the right religion, as
will be evidenced by the end of today's episode, but that Jo was a man
with human failings. The fact that the Laws had so much tied up in
Nauvoo likely put them in a place where they were uncomfortable with
thinking about the church critically. Like when I talk to my parents
about the church hoarding \$124 billion and using that money to silence
victims of sex abuse by church leadership. They've devoted their entire
lives to the church. Everything they know is tied to the church. Every
connection they have with any other human is almost exclusively within
the context of the church, whether they're neighbors my parents see
every Sunday, or their other people living in a community of extremely
high percentage of members, every interaction they have they assume that
chances are pretty good the person they're talking to are members. The
church, for my parents, represents everything good in their life. It's
because of the church that they enjoy so many things in life. Examining
the system that has made their life so good through a critical lens is
impossible. They can't question the church because that calls into
question everything to which they've devoted their entire lives.

I believe that William and Jane Law were in the same boat. They'd
completely given up everything they knew in Canada in order to move to
the Mormon settlement on the Mississippi. When they arrived in Nauvoo
with a train of wagons carrying supplies, the group of people who
received them were sick, destitute, and traumatized. The friendships the
Laws forged upon their arrival in Quincy and Commerce in summer of 1839
were friendships that none of us could ever understand.

Why, then, did Jo call William Law to the second-highest position of
church leadership? That's a deeper question I don't think could be
answered. Did he find that William Law, at age 30 was a motivated and
ambitious person who would give everything to the church? Was Joseph
attracted to Jane and called William to the presidency to get as close
as possible to one of his marks? Maybe those are too simplistic of
speculations. Maybe Jo saw somebody who was truly devoted and was smart
enough to be effective with whatever task he was given. Maybe William
and Jo became fast friends the way Jo did with many people and the
connection Jo and William shared, in addition to the friendship Jane Law
and Emma shared, was simply good chemistry. We can't ever know. All we
can do is speculate as to why somebody who was a relative newcomer to
the movement was given a position equal with Sidney Rigdon who'd been
there since the beginning.

Where Wilson Law was in all of this is a matter of question. He simply
doesn't have as many documents in church archives with his name on them
and Wilson occupied a much less prominent position in church leadership.
Therefore, we have to focus more heavily on William and Jane Law and
merely speculate about Wilson Law as we go.

During William Law's time in high-ranking offices within the church,
Nauvoo Government, and the Nauvoo Legion, he was highly favored by the
prophet. While Jo was in hiding to escape arrest, he recorded in August
1842 a series of visions he received; dreams is probably a better word
for what's recorded. He talks about his loved family, his wife Emma and
how "many were the revibrations of my mind when I contemplated for a
moment the many scenes we had been called to pass through. The fatigues,
and the toils, the sorrows, and sufferings," yet she "\[is\] here
undaunted, firm and unwavering, unchangeable, affectionate Emma." He
then saw in his visions his brother Hyrum, "a natural brother" with "a
faithful heart." When he received these visions, Jo was on the small
island in between Montrose on the Iowa side of the Mississippi, and
Nauvoo on the other. A group of the most highly trusted Mormon elites,
the who's who of ultimate Mormons, visited the prophet in his rathole
away from the view of the constables then staying in Nauvoo waiting to
capture Jo. Whatever happened that night is reflected fondly in Jo's
reminiscences, but he wasn't kind enough, or graphic enough, to leave
behind any description.

> My heart was overjoyed as I took the faithful band by hand, that stood
> upon the shore one by one. William Law, William Clayton, Dimick B.
> Huntington, George Miller were there. The above names constituted the
> little group. I do not think to mention the particulars of the history
> of that sacred night, which shall forever be remembered by me. But the
> names of the faithful are what I wish to record in this place. These I
> have met in prosperity and they were my friends, I now meet them in
> adversity, and they are still my warmer friends.

Something happened though. 1841, William Law and Jo were such good
friends that Jo called him to be a counselor to the church presidency.
1842, Jo considered him to be one of his warmest friends who met him in
his time of need when Jo was hiding from the law.

William Law, on the other hand, was beginning to falter in his loyalty
to the prophet. In late 1843, William Law began to openly subvert public
declarations by Jo about who the Mormons should vote for. The 1843
election was a divisive issue among church members. Jo had promised his
vote to a guy named Cyrus Walker because Walker agreed to defend Jo in
court when he was arrested by Sheriffs Reynolds and Wilson with order to
convey Jo to Missouri and answer for the crimes in 1838 as well as the
assassination attempt of Lilburn Boggs.

When it came time for the election, Jo promised that he'd vote for
Walker, but Walker was a Whig who couldn't promise the Mormons what the
Democrat Hoge could. So, Jo pulled a fast one and the day of the
election Jo called a public meeting to give the Mormons in Nauvoo a
sermon.

> Brother Hyrum tells me this morning that he has had a testimony to the
> effect it would be better for the people to vote for Hoge, and I never
> knew Hyrum say he ever had a revelation and it failed... I authorize
> all men to say I am a personal friend of Governor Ford.

But the meeting wasn't over just yet. After Jo stepped down from the
podium, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff himself took the stand and expounded on the
revelation. No record survives of what he said specifically. After Hyrum
finished, William Law took the stand in an epic display of
insubordination. This is from Governor Thomas Ford's History of
Illinois:

> William Law, another great leader of the Mormons, next appeared, and
> denied that the Lord had made any such revelation. He stated that, to
> his certain knowledge, the prophet Joseph was in favor of Mr. Walker,
> and that the prophet was more likely to know the mind of the Lord on
> the subject than the patriarch.

Hyrum took the stand again to respond to what William Law had just said
about Jo being in favor of Cyrus Walker and "repeated his revelation
with greater tone of authority."

Then Jo took the stand again to clear the air.

> \[Joe Smith\] there stated that "he himself was in favor of Mr.
> Walker, and intended to vote for him; that he would not, if he could,
> influence any voter in giving his vote; that he considered it a mean
> business for him or any other man to attempt to dictate to the people
> who they should support in elections; that he had heard his brother
> Hiram had received a revelation from the Lord on the subject;...
> brother Hiram \[is\] a man of truth; he had known brother Hiram
> intimately ever since he was a boy, and he had never known him to tell
> a lie. If brother Hiram said he had received such a revelation, he had
> no doubt it was a fact. When the Lord speaks, let all the earth be
> silent.

Now from History of Hancock County written by Thomas Gregg circa 1880.

> That settled it. The election occurred on the next day. It is believed
> the prophet did, with a few others, vote for Walker, in the face of
> the revelation; but the body of his followers voted for Hoge, giving
> him 2,088 votes to Walker's 733 in the county, and beating him in the
> district by 455 votes. This change of position at Nauvoo was not known
> in Adams county till after the election; so Mr. O. H. Browning, the
> Whig candidate in that district, received the Mormon vote there.

If William Law was experiencing cognitive dissonance before this
election, this must have certainly spiked those dark feelings. Like I
said, he'd given his whole life to the church and he obviously believed
it was true. But, what he saw was a grand display of Jo abusing the
pulpit to get political favors, which has always been a sticky issue in
American politics. William Law taking the stand and telling the people
to ignore Hyrum's revelation and vote with the prophet is quite
revealing. Jo and Hyrum had orchestrated this vote swap before they both
took the stand that day. William Law taking the stand and telling the
people to ignore Hyrum's revelation threw a wrench in Jo and Hyrum's
plan to get the democrat elected. Oh to see the anxious looks exchanged
between Jo and Hyrum as William Law was preaching against their scheme.
Oh to be a fly on the wall.

This election sermon and the outcome of the votes being cast evidences
when William Law really took a sharp turn away from the Nauvoo
leadership. Rumors of polygamy were growing out of control even though
the Bennett meltdown had been weathered. Two friends of William and Jane
Law from their time in Canada had been married to Joseph while he was
their guardian, that's Sarah and Maria Lawrence, both teenage sisters.
Polygamy was, in many ways for William Law, just a symptom of the
problems arising with Joseph Smith.

In exploration of William Law's reasons for turning defector, historian
Lyndon Cook published an article titled William Law, Nauvoo Dissenter in
the Winter 1982 edition of BYU Studies journal. In it, Cook cites 5
primary reasons for Law's dissent.

> According to his own statements..., William Law turned against the
> Mormon prophet because of William's perception that (1) Joseph was
> totally ungovernable and defiant and was determined to obey or disobey
> the law of the land at his convenience (i.e., a claim to higher law);
> (2) Joseph united church and state, both as mayor of Nauvoo... and as
> an influential religious leader by manipulating or seeking to
> manipulate politicians for private purposes (i.e., breakdown of the
> rule of law); (3) Joseph had allowed the established judicial order of
> church government to be trampled under foot; (4) Joseph had attempted
> to control the temporal (financial) interests of the Mormon people by
> ecclesiastical authority; and (5) more importantly, Joseph had
> corrupted the Church by introducing "false and damnable" doctrines
> such as a plurality of Gods, a plurality of wives, and the doctrine of
> unconditional sealing up unto eternal life (i.e., Joseph Smith was a
> fallen prophet).

In view of these rising tensions, Joseph Smith and William Law slowly
became enemies. Joseph could sense that William Law was a major problem
and he'd recently been through the ringer by one of his previous closest
advisors, John C. Wreck-it Bennett; Jo was determined to not make the
same mistakes with William Law. Any person of Law's rank defecting from
the church posed a significant threat to the prophet and his
inner-circle, just like with Bennett defecting.

Notably, William Law, in an interview taken for a Mormon expose
published in 1885, Law discussed his and Jane's reaction to learning
about plural marriage. "Hyrum gave it \[D&C 132\] to me in his office,
told me to take it home and read it, and then be careful with it, and
bring it back again... \[Jane\] and I were just turned upside down by
it,... We did not know what to do." This confusion turned to resolve as
1843 turned into 1844.

Early 1844 marked a new year with rising tensions between William Law
and Joseph Smith. Caught in the mix was Jane Law. The exact details of
what occurred here and the timing are really hard to nail down. It also
doesn't help that the historical record is clouded with conjecture and
public denials that anything occurred between Jane Law and Joseph Smith.
We discussed this back on our episodes going through D&C 132, the
polygamy revelation, but there is some evidence to conclude that Emma
wanted William Law for a spiritual husband, possibly in exchange for
Joseph taking Jane as a spiritual wife.

Whether or not this actually happened, the public consensus was that it
did happen, largely aided by an expose written by Joseph H. Jackson and
published in the Warsaw Signal.

> He had frequently heard of the spiritual wife doctrine from the
> Gentiles, but he, not having heard such doctrine taught by Smith, set
> it down as a slanderous persecution against the church. When, however,
> this new revelation was made known to him, his eyes were opened, and
> at once, he indignantly rejected the doctrines as not of God, but of
> the Devil. Such was his vehemence and indignation, that it became
> apparent to Joe, that he had presumed too much on Law\'s faith, and
> that it would be idle to attempt to stuff him with the doctrine. There
> was no alternative, therefore for Joe, but to destroy Law\'s
> influence, and therefore a great bustle was raised and Law cut off
> from the holy order. This placed Law, who was particularly sensitive,
> in an awful dilemma, and so powerfully did the frequent lectures he
> received, work upon his nerves, that I entertained serious
> apprehensions that he would become crazed. \
> \
> One Sunday morning, Joe and I had a long talk concerning Law, in which
> he avowed, not for the first time, however, his determination to put
> Law out of the way, for he had become dangerous to the church of Jesus
> Christ, of Latter Day Saints, and that it was the will of God that he
> should be removed. He, however, wished to proceed in such a manner
> that he would be able to get Law\'s wife.

Then it details how Jo set up the Nauvoo city police on a night watch to
catch William Law with his guard down, but it never worked. Then Jackson
goes on to say:

> Not only was his design to remove William Law, but also William Marks.
> The spite he had against the latter, arose from the fact, that he had
> endeavored to seduce the daughter of Marks, and she had informed her
> parents who were very wrathy, and Joe dreaded their influence. For
> this reason, he said that those individuals, if they were not checked,
> would ruin the church...
>
> Wm. and Wilson Law having heard, by the vague information they had
> received, that either one of them, or Marks was the Judas whom Joe
> sought, armed themselves and went to Joe\'s house. On seeing them, Joe
> became desperately alarmed and gave every evidence of his
> apprehensions. They had a long conversation, in the course of which
> Joe made some abusive remark, which so exasperated Wilson Law, that he
> drew his pistol, and made Joe swallow his words in a hurry. So great
> was the excitement, that it was with difficulty that William Law and
> Hyrum Smith, could prevent Wilson from firing. \
> \
> Joe seeing his plans foiled, determined on making capital of the whole
> affair, by raising the cry of persecution. Accordingly he called the
> City Council together, and in order to show the public that there was
> no ground for the rumors that had been afloat concerning the plot
> against Law, he brought all the forty guards up and questioned every
> man whether he had ever bound them by a secret oath. Every man
> appeared perfectly amazed, and not one had ever known of any such
> thing, nor did they know anything about the conspiracy against Law and
> Marks. This is part of Joe\'s game, whenever he is accused of secret
> plots, he calls his men, who are instructed to appear as foolish as
> possible, to disprove the accusation. In this instance they endeavored
> so hard to appear silly, that a sensible man might have detected the
> trick; but the faithful were convinced that Joe had been vilely
> persecuted and slandered, and that there was no ground whatever for
> the accusation against him.

This expose was written retrospectively from the events of early to
mid-1844 and after Joseph and Hyrum Smith had died in Carthage. Jackson
leaves out or only alludes to some important details. When Jo had
considered William Law to be enough of a threat, Jo removed him from the
presidency of the church in January of 1844. Well, William Law resigned
from the presidency on January 8^th^, but to what extent his resignation
was coerced is a subject that reasonable historians can disagree about.

According to William Law's son, Richard, William confronted Joseph Smith
about polygamy. "with his arms around the neck of the Prophet, was
pleading with him to withdraw the doctrine of plural marriage...
\[William\] pleaded for this with Joseph with tears streaming from his
eyes. The Prophet was also in tears, but he informed \[William\] that he
could not withdraw the doctrine, for God had commanded him to teach it,
and condemnation would come upon him if he was not obedient to the
commandment."

There is a disputed document that's only been made available to a few
people. Apparently William Law kept a journal in Nauvoo for the last
couple months of 1843 into the majority of 1844, which provides a window
into his inner turmoil about this escalating conflict. Notably, however,
is that the journal in question is not in church archives. Lyndon Cook
was apparently granted access to the journal to write his 1982 BYU
Studies article about William Law and Leonard Arrington, official church
historian beginning the late 1970s, shared correspondence with the
custodian of the document, a descendant of William Law. The person who
held the journal in 1978 was a recent convert who told Leonard Arrington
that her husband didn't want the church getting ahold of the journal and
various letters written by William Law. Ultimately, it is unknown where
the journal currently is. Maybe the church successfully acquired it from
the Law family descendants, maybe it remains in the family, maybe the
journal is a fabrication to begin with. We just don't know and
historians don't have access to the document to verify its pedigree or
authenticity. However, Lyndon Cook's article prints a number of extracts
from the journal without providing photographs or holographic
transcriptions of the document.

Here is a brief excerpt from that article containing William Law's
journal entry for the day he was released or he resigned from the church
presidency.

> William was further informed on 8 January 1844 that his rebellion had
> resulted in his being excluded from the anointed quorum and dropped
> from the First Presidency. While William considered these actions as
> "unjust and dishonourable," he believed that his dismissal had
> released him from a compromising position: "I feel relieved from a
> most embarrassing situation. I cannot fellowship the abominations
> which I verily know are practiced by this man, consequently I am glad
> to be free from him."

Once again, the document is disputed and historian Ben Park wrote a blog
post back in 2017 calling the veracity of the claimed journal into
question. However, it isn't unreasonable to think that William Law would
have started keeping this journal when he was beginning to calculate his
removal from the church. His resignation or removal from the presidency
and anointed quorum were milestones toward expose and apostasy from the
church under Jo's leadership.

This resignation event marks a hard turn away from the church leadership
and may be the marker by which we can judge Jo coming on to Jane Law. It
may have been that William learned of Jo's advances on Jane in early
January and resigned in protest. It was likely around this time that Jo
attempted to orchestrate the assassination of William Law, which he
corroborates in interviews and letter correspondences in the late 1880s.

Beyond that, according to Lyndon Cook's reading of Law's Nauvoo journal,
William mulled over the doctrine and teachings of the church for quite
some time.

> William seemed willing to be freed from the incubus of polygamy, but
> it would take time for him to abandon Mormonism altogether. The next
> few days and weeks provided an opportunity for deep reflection. His
> diary reveals that he was racked with self-doubt, and he realized that
> the cardinal underpinnings of his faith in Mormonism were being
> wrecked. On 13 January 1844 he bewailed his awful condition: "What my
> feelings have been I cannot relate, various and painful at times
> almost beyond endurance; a thousand recollections burst upon my
> burning brain, the past, the present, and the future, disappointed
> hopes, injured feelings, where they should have been held sacred...
> these things are as poison'd arrows in my bleeding heart."

This time of reflection after his removal from church leadership led to
some harsh decisions a few months in the future. Whatever privately
occurred between Jo and William Law in January of 1844, Jo publicly and
privately considered William and Jane Law to be threats and looped them
together with others who were threats to his leadership who we've
recently discussed.

In the February of 1844 High Council minutes, Jo said "I know it by the
Sp\[irit\] of the H Ghost---there is no man or woman can be saved upon
any o\[ther\] principle---for what we don't save in this probation we
must save them in an\[other\] & \[William\] Law & \[Robert D.\]
Foster... will never get out of hell until J\[oseph\] Smith unlocks it
for them."

In March of 1844, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith visited William Law in an
attempt to smooth over the ruffled feathers. To no avail. A later visit
in April of 1844 from Almon W. Babbit resulted in the same opposition.
What William Law wanted was something that Jo and the leadership were
not willing to give up. Law wanted the leadership to give up polygamy
and the more esoteric practices and doctrines of the church. Law wanted
Jo to declare from the pulpit that he'd been teaching polygamy and to
disavow the practice and cease it completely. Jo would never do this.
Thus, the visits from church leaders revealed to William Law that more
drastic measures were necessary. On the flipside, Law's repeated refusal
to reconcile differences revealed to Jo and the leadership that Law was
too dangerous and something was bound to break. Pressure was building,
who or what would be the fault line?

Jo made a bold move on April 18, 1844, just a week after the King
Follett Discourse was given at that month's General Conference. The High
Council decided to excommunicate both William and Jane Law... in
absentia.

From Lyndon Cook's 1982 article:

> The trial of excommunication (18 April 1844) involved thirty-two male
> members. Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Sidney Rigdon were
> conspicuously absent; and while Church Bishop Newel K. Whitney did
> participate in the trial, it was Brigham Young, President of the
> Twelve Apostles, who presided. Because William Law had been "dropped"
> from the First Presidency by the Prophet in early January 1844, the
> court handled the case as if William were a private member. Law argued
> that such was not the case. He insisted that without being convicted
> of wrongdoing he was still a member of the Presidency, and he
> protested that he could not be summarily excluded from the Church *in
> absentia*.
>
> William Law learned of his excommunication from William Marks the day
> after the trial. Law's democratic individualism and Irish passion were
> registering high marks as he recorded his sentiments in his diary: "We
> consider this cutting off as illegal, and, therefore corrupt." Nettled
> that he had been excluded from the Church without being officially
> charged or notified, William demanded in writing the names of his
> accusers, the nature of the indictment, "who the witnesses were,
> \[and\] what they proved." The following day William Law asked Willard
> Richards, the Prophet's clerk, for a transcript of the minutes of the
> trail but was informed that "there was no record." An entry in Law's
> diary summarized his evaluation of these actions: "By the above the
> Church has as a body transgressed the laws of the Church and of God &
> every principle of justice and are under deep transgression."

It wasn't just William Law, but also Robert D. Bob the Builder Foster,
Wilson Law, William's brother, Jane, William's wife, and a guy named
Howard Smith who were all excommunicated that day. What was William Law
to do? He had been removed from the Presidency, he and Jane had been
excommunicated, the prophet had directed that nobody was transact any
business with the Laws in order to starve them out. William Law believed
the church was true but that Joseph was a fallen prophet in addition to
being an unlawful tyrant. What could William Law do under these
circumstances? Save the gospel from the despot who'd sullied it.

Ten days after these people were excommunicated, Jo's journal reads as
follows:

> 28 April 1844
>
> There was a meeting at Gens. Wm. & Wilsons Laws---near the saw
> mill---of those who had been cut off from the church & their
> dupes---Several affidavits were taken and read against Joseph and
> othe\[r\]s---Wm Law. Wilson Law. Austin D Cowles John Scott sen.
> Francis M. Higbee, D \[R\] D. Foster and Robert Pie\[r\]ce. Were
> appointed a committe\[e\] to visit the diff\[er\]ent famili\[e\]s of
> the city & see who would joinn the new chu\[r\]ch---(IE) it was
> decided that Joseph was fallen---prophet. &c\--& Wm Law was appointed
> in his place. Austin---Cowls & Wilson Law Coun\[c\]illors---R. D
> Foster & F M. Higbee to the 12 apostles.\--&c as report
> Says---El---James---Blake\[s\]ly prea\[c\]hed up Joseph in the A.M. &
> PM. joind th\[e\] anties \[anti's\]---Cha\[rle\]s Ivins Bishop

On April 28, 1844, William Law formed a new Mormon religion and was
appointed the new prophet, seer, and revelator of it. This newly formed
church was called "the True Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints"... real original, Bill. Not only was a new church formed right
under the thumb of the prophet, they also appointed a new quorum of
apostles, a new bishop, and William Law appointed counselors in Austin
Cowles and his brother Wilson Law. In addition to organizing this market
competitor, the primary purpose of the meeting was to allow an open
space for those frustrated, disenchanted, or altogether infuriated by
the wrongs they'd suffered by the Nauvoo government and church
leadership, because they were run by the same people, to air out their
grievances. A dissenting church being formed in Nauvoo with the express
purpose of calling Jo's leadership into question and documenting his
behavior was the greatest threat the prophet had experienced in his
entire ministry.

You see, Jo had dealt with competitor churches organized by those who'd
been excommunicated before. But, this was different. His conduct in the
past had been excusable by extreme mental plasticity, but what he'd done
in Nauvoo... what he'd BECOME in Nauvoo, was much harder to justify than
any other time.

I can imagine that it's tough for a demagogue to get a good night's
rest. The tossing and turning from a racing mind must have worn on him
as much as any other tyrant throughout history. Joseph lived under a
constant threat of exposure for his illegal and immoral acts. Never had
that threat been more present than when William Law, who'd previously
been Jo's left-hand man, formed his own religion calling himself a
prophet. This True Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints was
exactly the mainstream Mormon church that folks would be searching for
when they were tired of the constant outrage and scandal coming from
Jo's church. It held to all the same teachings as Mormonism of 1841, but
didn't practice the more controversial doctrines of plural wives,
sealing, endowments, infinite regression of a council of gods, and
anything else that other Protestant considered anti-Christ or
anti-Biblical. Jo was off the rails, William Law's church was a new set
of rails.

What did this new church have planned? What would they do with the
information they collected from all the defectors from the faith? Well,
as we read at the end of the last two episodes about the Fosters and
Higbees, Jo's journal tells us that the threat was imminent and very
real.

May 7^th^, 1844.

> An opposition printing press arrived at Dr \[Robert D.\] Fosters
> fr\[o\]m Columbus ohio. as report says

As soon as this press arrived, Robert D. Bob the Builder Foster set it
up and made the first printing of the most consequential printing press
in Mormon history second only to the E.B. Grandin company press in
Palmyra.

> Prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor
>
> The Expositor will be devoted to a general diffusion of useful
> knowledge, and its columns open for the admission of all courteous
> Communications of Religious, Moral, Social, Literary, or Political
> character, without taking a decided stand in favor of either of the
> great Political Parties of the country. A part of its columns will be
> devoted to a few primary objects, which the Publishers deem of vital
> importance to the public welfare. Their particular locality gives them
> a knowledge of the many **Gross abuses exercised under the "pretended"
> authorities of the Charter of the City of Nauvoo,** by the Legislative
> authorities of said city; and the *Insupportable OPPRESSIONS of the
> MINISTERIAL powers, in carrying out the* Unjust, Illegal, *and*
> Unconstitutional *Ordinances of the same.* The Publishers, therefore,
> deem it a sacred duty they owe to their country and their fellow
> citizens, to advocate, through the columns of the EXPOSITOIN, the
> UNCONDITIONAL REPEAL OF THE NAUVOO CITY CHARTER---to restrain and
> correct the abuses of the UNIT POWER---to ward off the Iron Rod which
> is held over the devoted heads of the citizens of Nauvoo and the
> surrounding country---to advocate unmitigated *DISOBEDIENCE* to
> *POLITICAL REVEALTIONS*, and to censure and decry gross moral
> imperfections wherever found, either in the Plebian, Patrician, or
> SELF-CONSTITUTED MONARCH---to advocate the pure principles of
> morality, the pure principles of truth, designed not to destroy, but
> strengthen the main-spring of God's moral government---to advocate,
> and exercise, the freedom of speech in Nauvoo, independent of the
> ordinances abridging the same---to give *free toleration to every
> man's Religious sentiments*, and sustain ALL in worshiping their God
> according to the monitions of their consciences, as guarantied by the
> Constitution of our country, and to oppose, with uncompromising
> hostility, any **UNION OF CHURCH AND STATE** or any preliminary step
> tending to the same---to *sustain ALL, however humble*, in their equal
> and Constitutional RIGHTS---and oppose the sacrifice of the Liberty,
> the Property, and the Happiness of the *MANY,* to the *Pride* and
> *Ambition* of the *FEW*. In a word, to give a full, candid, and
> succinct statement of FACTS, AS THEY REALLY EXIST IN THE CITY OF
> NAUVOO---*Fearless of whose particular case the facts may
> apply*---being governed by the laws of Editorial courtesy and the
> inherent dignity which is inseparable from honorable minds, at the
> same time exercising their own judgment in cases of flagrant abuses,
> or moral delinquencies---to use such terms and names as they deem
> proper, when the object is of such high importance that the end will
> justify the means. In this great and indispensable work, we
> confidently look to an enlightened public to aid us in our laudable
> effort.
>
> The first number of the Expositor will be issued on Friday, the 7^th^
> day of June 1844.
>
> Publishers:\
> WILLIAM LAW\
> WILSON LAW\
> CHARLES IVINS\
> FRANCIS M. HIGBEE\
> CHAUNCEY L. HIGBEE\
> ROBERT D. FOSTER\
> CHARLES A. FOSTER

There's a very specific shirt in my dresser that I like to wear. I got
it back in October 2018 from a very special place. Annie and I spent a
month in Europe and one of the first stops we made was Lutherstadt
Wittenburg. This is the town in which Martin Luther published his
translation of the Bible, first of the New Testament in 1522, then of
the complete Bible with apocrypha in 1534. According to legend, the
Wittenburg chapel is also where Luther nailed his 95 Thesis to the door
of the catholic chapel. I know the story is disputed, but legends
usually are even if they contain kernels of truth. Wittenburg has
changed hands a few times since Luther and Philipp Melanchthon spent
years translating the Bible, not from the Latin Vulgate, but from the
Greek and Hebrew, using as original of sources as they had access to.
Today the town is a tourist destination and for many viewed as a
Protestant pilgrimage, almost a holy land. It's a beautiful city and I
couldn't help but buy a T-shirt from one of the local shops with Martin
Luther on it. He isn't recognizable to anybody other than religious
history junkies like yours truly so whenever somebody asks me "who's
that," I respond with, "he's my spirit animal."

I know, most people's spirit animal isn't a human. Maybe it's an eagle,
or a fox, or like Annie, maybe your spirit animal is a sloth. Humans are
animals and Martin Luther is my spirit animal. Martin Luther crippled a
millennium long theocratic empire with nothing more than information. He
took information that was exclusive and tightly controlled and gave it
to the people in a way they could understand. That information was
claimed to be the literal word of God and Catholicism had leveraged that
exclusivity to establish and maintain a theocracy larger and more
powerful and wealthy than nearly any other empire humanity has ever
seen.

No sword, chariot, or horse-archer could legitimately threaten the
complete and total power of Catholicism for over 1000 years. One person
comes along with one book and strikes a fatal blow. Owing to the power
of the printing press, the German translation of the Bible from the
original languages could be purchased by anybody. It wasn't long before
every bishop was on an even battlefield with anybody else who was
literate. They now had equal access to the claimed word of god.
Everybody could access information equally. No longer was Catholicism
the only middle-man between people and their deity. Rampant corruption
caused by indulgences feeding the monster were brought into question as
there was no biblical defense for the practice.

Just by publishing information via the printing press, an overwhelming
empire around which society had been constructed was rendered a
vestigial cancer. The power of the printing press has never been truly
quantified. The democratization of information and rapidly increased
literacy rates have been the building blocks of society as we know it
since the enlightenment. The enlightenment itself wouldn't have happened
without the printing press. Medicine, geology, all the sciences, music,
theater, all the arts, novels, textbooks, all the quantitative knowledge
of humanity, none of these would be what they are today without the
printing press. Everything we enjoy in society is because of the
printing press. It is a tool of unmatched impact and power.

A printing press made Joseph Smith who he was. It started with the E.B.
Grandin Press in Palmyra printing 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon.
After that, a printing press was never far from his hand. The Evening
and the Morning Star, the Messenger and Advocate, the Elders' Journal,
the Millennial Star, the Times and Seasons, The Gospel Reflector, The
Wasp, and The Nauvoo Neighbor all worked to build the Mormon empire. The
information produced by these printing presses continually elevated
Joseph Smith to a higher, and higher, and higher lattice of religious
power.

The higher the tower, the harder it falls. What these 7 publishers
proved to us is that no matter how powerful an empire becomes; it is
always vulnerable to truth. Yes, a printing press placed Joseph Smith in
the public light, gained him a following, made him obscenely wealthy,
and provided for him a fast and hard lifestyle few ever get to enjoy.
But another printing press would bookend his public life as prophet,
seer, and revelator. The pen is mightier than the sword and a printing
press does the work of a thousand pens every minute.

One doesn't end an empire by force. The only true end to any tyrannical
reign is infection. You can't hit it head on, so you make it sick and
weaken it from within. The Nauvoo Expositor, and the infection caused by
its 7 publishers, would prove to be the fatal blow that Joseph Smith's
empire couldn't overcome.

Kent Judkins ANONYMOUS message

Psych event hopefully in September
