---
layout: post
title: >
    Road to Carthage 1 - Avarice
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/road-carthage-1-avarice/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/road-to-carthage-1-avarice
libsyn_embed: 15154055

category: RTC
date: 2020-07-09 20:00:00 PDT
---

Road to Carthage 1 - Avarice

On this episode, we examine money and power in early Mormonism.

Show links:  
Website
[<u>http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com</u>](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [<u>@NakedMormonism</u>](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook
[<u>https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311</u>](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311)  
Patreon
[<u>http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism</u>](http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism)  
Music by Jason Comeau
[<u>http://aloststateofmind.com/</u>](http://aloststateofmind.com/)  
Show Artwork
[<u>http://weirdmormonshit.com/</u>](http://weirdmormonshit.com/)  
Legal Counsel [<u>http://patorrez.com/</u>](http://patorrez.com/)

I want to tell all of you a story. This is a story that’s been told
millions of times by millions of people.

It’s a story we’ve spent nearly 6 years learning together; a story with
heroes and villains, love and hate, saviors and murderers, devotion and
betrayal, giving and taking away, peace and war, altruism and greed,
achievements and slothfulness, starvation and gluttony, generosity and
envy, detestation and lust, kindness and wrath, shame and pride; at the
end of it all, this is a story about life and death itself. This is a
story of humanity in all its glory and depravity.

Certain figures throughout human history are worth studying. These
figures are often influential and frequently their legacy isn’t realized
until long after their deaths. Why though? Why do we take note of these
figures? I think it’s because they teach us something about ourselves
that transcends the time in which they lived; they carry with them
aspects of what makes humans… human.

There are, however, other reasons to focus on these individuals. In our
case, this man started a religion that grew and flourished in frontier
America and now boasts membership of more than 16 million people; it is
the most politically powerful and wealthiest religion in America.
American history, broadly, would be different had this person not
founded the religion of Mormonism; this forces us to take a step back
and ask how things got to be the way they are, the very purpose of
studying history to begin with. The existence of what we see today
requires explanation. In the context of Mormonism, we have the Book of
Mormon. How did it come to be? How did the other books of Mormon
scripture come to be? These questions are the first place to begin an
understanding of the prevailing religion in Utah today, the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The founder of this religion truly defies description. He’s a man who
is, by all measurements, stranger than fiction. The largest descendant
religion from the cult Joseph Smith created has a sales force of tens of
thousands of young adults, handing out his writings, teaching those
who’re curious about this man’s life and legacy, seeking converts to
the tune of hundreds of thousands every year. These missionaries will
tell you about a young boy who, at the age of 14, was disenchanted with
the religious world in which he lived. This young boy ventured into the
woods and prayed to god to guide him to the correct religion. In an
unexpected turn of events, Elohim and Jesus Christ appeared to young
Joseph. Jesus told him all the creeds were an abomination in his sight;
that those professors were all corrupt. In a few short years after this
first vision, young Joseph was visited by the angel Moroni and
instructed over the period of 4 years in the ways of god. After this
probationary period, Moroni led Joseph to a place known as Hill Cumorah
where Joseph discovered ancient gold plates, written by ancient
Israelite Native Americans who sailed to America in 2500 BC and 600 BC
and believed in Christianity. They practiced the original religion
created by God and completed by Jesus Christ, which was lost during the
great apostasy, which Joseph restored when he translated those gold
plates into english by the power of god. He was a great prophet who gave
many revelations beyond the Book of Mormon, which were compiled together
into the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. These with
the Bible comprise the standard works of the gospel. If you simply agree
to take the missionary’s copy of the Book of Mormon and schedule an
evening visit, they’ll be happy to answer any questions you might have
and teach you how families were together before birth and can be
together for eternity.

These missionaries are clean and well-behaved looking young people.
They’ll even help you do yard work or carry in the groceries if you
need it. They’ll be happy to tell you they came out on this mission as
soon as they graduated high school of their own volition and they even
paid for everything themselves by working summer jobs and saving up
before they left. These missionaries look so good, they don’t drink or
party like nearly everybody else their age, they always smile and their
work ethic is unparalleled; this religion must be a good place to raise
a family.

You take a few lessons and learn more stories of how Mormon scripture
came to be, the deeper doctrines, temple ordinances, the Plan of
Salvation, the Word of Wisdom; anything you might want to know, they
spoon feed right to your hungry mind. As long as you show willingness to
listen to what they say and don’t give any pushback whatsoever, they’ll
keep showing up with big smiles. But, god forbid, if you ask them about
a rock and a hat, polygamy, the Kirtland Safety Society, or anything
else which doesn’t fit perfectly into the scripted narrative they’re
selling, those missionaries fall silent. They get shifty-eyed. They
begin to reschedule visit times. They stop coming around so often.
Eventually, they break all contact because you’re led astray by the
ever-present force that is the adversary.

Around the world, in over 120 countries, in over 100 languages, this
same script plays out in tens of thousands of households every single
day. These young adults who know very little of how the world works, are
telling unsuspecting people about the history of Mormonism and Mormon
scripture. These are the people telling the story of Joseph Smith and
the early church he formed.

There’s a problem, though. It’s all a lie. It’s a lie, carefully
contrived and correlated for over a century and a half to be appealing,
beautiful, and faith promoting. The lie runs so deep that these
missionaries don’t know they’re telling you a lie. They were lied to
their entire life, as were their parents and grandparents, great
grandparents, and great great great grandparents who were converted by
Joseph Smith themselves.

This lie has such a powerful hold on these kind and good-hearted young
adults that the second a single iota of truth is introduced to them,
they’re so thoroughly and unflinchingly taught to shut down their minds
so no information can penetrate the mental barriers. With only a few
exceptions which prove the rule, complete and total adherence to this
lie is the only way to survive in the church. Members go their entire
lives with these mental survival mechanisms acting as intellectual white
blood cells to attack and eliminate any outside information which
contradicts the lie.

But, with enough information, that mental immune system becomes
overwhelmed. Cognitive dissonance causes enough discomfort that these
people will begin to place forbidden questions onto the center stage of
their minds. The information contagion needs only one question to take
root, was Joseph Smith really a prophet of god, and from that single
cell it can grow and expand into more questions. Given a nurturing
mental environment, that question eventually becomes an afterthought as
far more difficult questions push their way to the front of these
people’s minds. Did Joseph Smith print counterfeit money? Did Joseph
Smith manufacture a set of plates? Did Joseph command assassinations in
the name of god? Did Smith commit treason? Did Jo rape teenage girls?
What reason do I have to believe anything this monster ever said?

Once these questions are rooted deep within the synapses of a believer’s
mind, the monolith which endowed an incredibly resilient system of
beliefs into their minds begins to crumble. A new set of questions
present themselves. Am I the only one with these questions? Who can I
share these questions with? Where can I go to find a support system of
people with the same questions? If the morals the church raised me with
are flawed, what *are* my morals? Why was this information hidden from
me for so long? How could I have been so stupid to believe this my
entire life? Will my family shun me if I take off my garments? If the
one true religion is false, are all religions false? If the church lied
to me about its history, what else are they hiding?

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a cult. It has taught
us a false narrative of its history to push its agenda. It has
deliberately obfuscated, suppressed, or outright lied about how it came
into existence because the truth really is stranger than fiction. The
painstaking and tenuous process of revisionist Mormon history has been a
fight raging among academics for over a century. In many ways
revisionism in Mormon history is nearly as old as the religion itself.
From the first satirical expose written while the Book of Mormon was
being published, people devoted to exposing truth have been firing shots
at the absurdity of Joseph Smith’s story since the beginning. When we
consider the landscape, it’s never been a fair fight. Any time a fact
fights a religious belief, that belief proves unrelenting and
tenaciously resilient in spite of the facts. Doubt your faith before you
doubt the facts falters in pathological immunity to doubt your doubts
before you doubt your beliefs. People retreat to a comfortable lie
before venturing into the uncomfortable unknown.

This aspect of the human condition gives the colossus of lies an upper
hand in every fight for the mind, because it’s already won the heart.
The fight for the mind has never been fair. The church has coordinated
its history, suppressed documents, hidden uncomfortable truths behind
partial lies, and constructed a fictitious narrative since day one.
Backing this propaganda effort has often been a team of sophists
masquerading as historians who’ve worked tirelessly to correlate the
lies into an overarching narrative that passes the smell test. Millions
of man-hours, billions of dollars, legions of apologists and historians
paid by the church have waged an all-out information war against
independent researchers with nothing more than a drive to search, learn,
and teach.

For those of us who are independent researchers, the battle isn’t fair
and we know it. We’re outgunned, outnumbered, outclassed, and
underfunded. We don’t have missionaries, emotive hymns, threats of
punishment in the afterlife, familial indoctrination and coerced
compliance, monetary extortion based on salvation, correlated lesson
manuals and armies of members who push them every sunday and most
weekdays in seminary. But, we have one soldier in this battle who is,
and remains, undefeated… information. The sanitizing light of
information is an ally who never tires, never sleeps, and never
retreats. This ally won’t shoulder the entire war for us, but it will
never let us down if we show unyielding loyalty to it. More information
will always hurt the correlated narrative of Mormonism because it relies
on suppression of information to survive. Information with the
reinforcement squad of skepticism will be our scout, attack, and defense
squad as this war of information rages on.

Nothing short of total and complete iconoclasm will shatter this edifice
of lies. Over the next 10 weeks, we’re going to explore the history of
Mormonism the church refuses to teach. We’ll discuss stories within this
religion and its founder, Joseph Smith, which tell a more complete
narrative of this controversial figure and the cult he founded. Joseph
Smith didn’t just translate the Book of Mormon, build a temple, get
thrown into jail because of religious persecution, then get shot and
died as a martyr. There’s so much more and the greatest sin against any
historical figure is reducing their humanity down to a pathetically
simplistic narrative to sell a religion. Praise to the man who communed
with Jehovah is what we sing as children before we know what any of
those words mean.

Today we begin the first of 10 episodes of Mormon history. We’ll cover
the 4 main geographies of Mormon operation, New York, Kirtland Ohio,
Missouri, and Nauvoo Illinois. Each of these locations contains numerous
stories to highlight and examine through different lenses and each of
the first 7 episodes in our 10 episode series will be doing just that.
The church began in New York under Joseph Smith. Greener grass beckoned
the prophet to Kirtland, Ohio where he joined with Sidney Rigdon and
constructed a pseudo-democratic religious empire. Money troubles and
dissent from within forced the prophet to Missouri, where the church had
a foothold from its earliest days. War, and the resulting extermination
order sent the Mormons packing to Nauvoo, Illinois, where Jo
successfully constructed a theocratic empire, sovereign in its power and
overt in its draconianism. This empire kept him and his closest friends
safe in their criminality for years as they planned the overthrow of the
world, until vigilante justice left the prophet and two of his brothers
dead and his church without a supreme leader, inciting a multiple
decades’-long schism crisis, spawning hundreds of child religions in
existence today.

With the battlefield, and our path through it, laid ahead, let’s begin
where it all started with the young man responsible for starting
Mormonism. Joseph Smith grew up very poor in a largely uneducated
family. An important point to make here is education and intelligence
are different things. They’re often correlated but uneducated people can
be smart and people with lots of degrees can be insufferable morons.

Jo’s parents, Lucy Mack and Joseph Smith Sr., married in 1796. According
to Lucy’s family history, her brother Stephen gave her a wedding gift of
$1,000. But, as a harbinger of future events, Joseph Sr. lost the entire
amount when he got suckered in an investment scam. He spent a bunch of
money buying ginseng, and then arranged to export it to China. His
business partner, a Mr. Stevens, ran off to Canada with the entire
proceeds of the deal, leaving Joseph Sr. with $1800 in debt, shouldered
by the entire Smith family. They sold their farm, which was worth $1500,
for just $800 to cover a portion of the debt. The other $1000 came out
of Lucy’s wedding gift, leaving the newlyweds with nothing. The impacts
of this situation are far-reaching because, I would speculate, the
lesson little Joey took from his dad getting scammed was that there are
two kinds of people in the world: those who cheat, and those who get
cheated.

Lucy’s father let the newlyweds rent part of his Vermont farmland for a
while until they got back on their feet. Then they moved to New
Hampshire, where Jo Jr. had one of the most traumatic experiences of his
life. There was a terrible epidemic of typhoid, and his sister Sophronia
almost died. All the kids caught it and it was a really hard time for
the entire Smith family. The illness resulted in Jo growing abscesses on
his shoulder and his leg, the latter so bad that doctors wanted to
amputate. Thanks to an experimental medical procedure, and Lucy’s
vehement advocacy for her son’s future, Jo got to keep the leg, but he
underwent an excruciating surgery without anesthetic and walked on
crutches for a year. Amputation in the 19th-century meant damnation to a
life of vagrancy and begging. It’s a harsh reality Lucy knew and wanted
better for her son.

The family moved back to Vermont, where they had more financial
failures. Extremely cold winters destroyed their crops three years in a
row, and they barely managed to have enough crusty bread to feed the
kids. Finally they decided to move to Palmyra, New York for better
weather. Lucy had to sell everything they owned in order to pay their
debts before they left, and Joseph Sr. had to borrow more money to pay
for a wagon to carry them there. Lucy’s family history says she arrived
in Palmyra with two cents in cash. Jo Sr., or BDC as we call him on the
show, went ahead and looked for a job and land while Lucy brought the
kids and their few remaining possessions with some troubles along the
way. The coach they hired was piloted by a drunkard who tried to double
charge them. Lucy commandeered the coach and brought her family to New
York driving the coach herself.

Their first year in New York they apparently did alright, mostly because
Lucy started a successful business to decorate furniture with painted
oilcloth, a source of income for nearly her entire life. Joseph Sr. and
his sons built a cabin and cleared some farmland by felling trees on a
small plot. But the second year they barely made their mortgage payment.
Lucy says they were “destitute of money, property, or acquaintance.” The
only reason they kept the farm was because the eldest son Alvin worked
himself to the bone earning money to pay the mortgage. Alvin managed to
stabilize his parents’ finances and started building them a nicer house
by 1824, but then he got sick and died, leaving the family without its
primary provider.

What was Jo’s dad doing during all of this? Well, he and his sons worked
as laborers for a local farmer named Jeremiah Hurlburt, but their
relationship with him broke down and they ended up suing each other. He
also ran a cake and beer shop out of his house, and he and his sons sold
the beer and baked goods out of a little cart they pushed around town
during the summers. But unfortunately, Jo Sr. dabbled a little too deep
into company stock. Neighbors like Barton Stafford and Isaac Butts said
that Joseph Sr. was a “noted drunkard.” Neighbor Lorenzo Saunders even
told a story about Joseph Sr. getting drunk at the pub and bragging
about how big his dick was. Apparently the other drunks tried to measure
it and pushed a ruler through the seat of his pants. Historian Dan Vogel
straight-up calls Joseph Sr. an “alcoholic.” We’ll discuss this further
in another episode in the series.

So the Smith men mostly did odd jobs and didn’t have a very stable
income or a great reputation in the neighborhood. Eps 1, 10, 11, 12, 16,
and 20. One of the odd jobs they did was money-digging. At night they
would go out and dig for Indian springs, old Spanish mines, or chests of
pirate gold and other treasures. This may seem insane to us, but there
was a whole treasure digging culture in New York, and a whole genre of
stories about treasures guarded by spirits and ghosts. Eps 152, 153. The
common practice of treasure diggers was to hire a diviner or seer to
locate the treasure, and a conjuror or necromancer to bind the spirit so
they could get the treasure before the binding spell broke. But if you
committed some error in the ritual, like speaking out of turn, placing
the iron or witch-hazel rods in the wrong place, speaking the
incantation incorrectly, performing the spell under the wrong governing
planet, or myriad other errors, the spirit would whisk away the treasure
and cause it to sink. Damn Ground Gnomes are so elusive. Understandably,
the treasure-digging group almost always committed some error or didn’t
account for some variable and the treasure would be lost. Usually the
conjuror still managed to walk away with a little pocket money from the
person who hired them to begin with. The diggers themselves were
probably comprised of some folks who understood it was all a con, and
others who truly believed they’d eventually get the money located by the
seer or diviner. However, other aspects of treasure digging were
unabashedly a con. Treasure digs were also a fantastic way to launder
counterfeit money, accusations which plagued Joseph Jr for much of his
public life and contributed to his assassination in Carthage Jail.

Historian Dan Vogel in his biography of Joseph Smith has laid out really
well how these conjurors basically were con artists preying on naive
farmers by leading them on with the promise of treasure. Jo got pretty
good at this hustle, probably under the watchful eye of BDC and other
mentors equally steeped in the occult. Jo developed a reputation in the
neighborhood for being a powerful seer. Ep 10. About 1823 he started
telling stories about a golden book that was buried somewhere in the
neighborhood-- an ancient record written on gold plates. One of the last
things that Jo’s oldest brother Alvin said to him before he died? “Do
everything that lies in your power to obtain the record.” With Alvin
gone, Joseph Sr. drunk half the time, and Lucy at home trying
desperately to support ten kids, Jo’s treasure-digging con offered a
potential way to feed the family. Here’s one example, from a neighbor
named William Stafford. According to Stafford, the Smiths

> devised a scheme, by which they might satiate their hunger, with the
> mutton of one of my sheep. They had seen in my flock of sheep, a
> large, fat, black weather. Old Joseph and one of the boys came to me
> one day, and said that Joseph Jr. had discovered some very remarkable
> and valuable treasures, which could be procured only in one way. That
> way, was as follows: -- That a black sheep should be taken on to the
> ground where the treasures were concealed -- that after cutting its
> throat, it should be led around a circle while bleeding. This being
> done, the wrath of the evil spirit would be appeased: the treasures
> could then be obtained, and my share of them was to be four fold. To
> gratify my curiosity, I let them have a large fat sheep. They
> afterwards informed me, that the sheep was killed pursuant to
> commandment; but as there was some mistake in the process, it did not
> have the desired effect. This, I believe, is the only time they ever
> made money-digging a profitable business.

This language Stafford used here is super important. “Pursuant to
commandment” and the weather being black particularly are both important
ingredients to Christian occult magic. The lamb was to be used as the
scapegoat for cleansing the diggers of any sins. They’d cast their sins
into the weather, sacrifice it and spread its blood in a circle around
the location of buried treasure, thus binding the treasure and its
spirit guardian to the location long enough for them to unearth it and
cast the guardian spirit off from the treasure. This is deeply rooted in
Israelite Torah tradition of sacrificial offerings; they likely burned
the lamb as offering once it had been bled out and then consumed the
kosher meat.

D. Michael Quinn’s Early Mormonism and the Magic World View deals with
this synthesis of Christian beliefs and occult traditions. From page 70.

> No known denunciation of the family ever used the phrase “faculty of
> Abrac,” even though Lucy Mack smith did. Neighbors accused Joseph Jr.
> and Se. of practicing certain treasure-digging ceremonies, and it was
> Lucy Smith who used the phrase linking these accusations to ritual
> magic. Mormon historian Richard L. Bushman observed that thereby Lucy
> “revealed a knowledge of magic formulas and rituals.” One Palmyra
> resident reported that the prophet’s mother also performed various
> forms of magic divination, including palmistry… Marvin S. Hill has
> concluded: “In her mind magic circles, sooth saying, and other magical
> arts were one with her religious activities.”

Even the dagger they likely used in slitting the throat of the lamb had
magical significance. “the Hyrum Smith family has preserved as an
heirloom the kind of dagger necessary for ritual magic.” which Quinn
prints pictures of in his book. Today’s perspective of the occult being
tied to satanism and evil spirits is a modern perspective. The division
between white and black magic was highly observed by Jo and the family
in order to be shown the gift and power of god in all their endeavors.
Any biblical sins, adultery, fornication out of wedlock, debauchery, all
were seen as habits and sins which needed to be cleansed in order for
the human spirits to have any power over the ancient spirits which
guarded the treasure.

The question then becomes, did Jo really believe in this magic or was it
all a con? I think that’s a false dichotomy because both can be true. He
made his meager living from clearly conning people with the hopes that
one day the treasure they finally acquired would get him rich. Enough
failed digs, however, will produce more deliberate cons to pay the
bills. These cons weren’t confined to Jo alone as his dad had taught him
the ways of a juggler-magician from a young age.

So when Jo got a job to go hunt for treasure in Pennsylvania for a guy
named Josiah Stowell, who offered him “high wages,” guess who decided to
come help, leaving his farm and family untended in order to chase
treasure? None other than the village drunk, Joseph Smith Sr.

Unfortunately the next mortgage payment was coming up, and the creditors
came around and started asking questions. Apparently Jo and his dad had
left his brother Hyrum in charge of the farm during their absence, and
Hyrum allegedly was cutting down the maple orchard and burning fence
rails for fuel. A guy named Russell Stoddard who wanted to buy the farm
notified the Smiths’ lender of all of this, and the lender evicted the
Smiths from their farm and home well before their mortgage payment
deadline. Lucy and the kids moved into Hyrum’s little cabin.

The Smiths started canvassing all their friends and neighbors for help,
and fortunately they found someone who agreed to buy it and let them
stay for one year in exchange for six months’ labor on his farm by Jo’s
younger brother Samuel. At this point, the Smiths became renters instead
of owners. When Lucy writes about all of this in her family history, she
reports that they were absolutely devastated.

Here’s one more anecdote that illustrates just how poor the Smiths were.
Stephen Harding once visited their shack during the typesetting of the
Book of Mormon. Jo’s mother, Lucy, served him milk, rye bread, and
raspberries for dinner, and then she lit a tin candlestick so they could
read to him from the manuscript of the Book of Mormon. As she lit the
candle, she remarked, “This is the only candle I can find in the house;
I thought I had two, but mabby the rats has eat it up.” According to
Harding, the candle was used up by 10 P.M.

Take a step back and consider this family culture in which Jo grew up.
Jo’s psychology and his urgency about making money was an ever-present
driving factor in his day-to-day life. His family was dirt poor. Not
only did they have no cash on hand, but they didn’t own property and
their reputation in the community was such that no sane person would
give them any credit by which to extricate themselves from this
destitution. Jo grew up on scraps, clothed in rags. In fact, Joseph Sr.
in the late 1810s actually spent 30 days in a debtor’s prison, when Jo
wasn’t even a teenager yet, for failing to fulfill the obligations of a
business contract. The only way the Smiths were able to afford their
Manchester farmhouse was because Alvin Smith’s industrious fortitude
made him able to pay the first two payments as cosigner for the land
deed. Alvin Smith was a bulwark for the family, a sturdy foundation
around which the family could build some semblance of a life. His
mysterious death in 1823 wasn’t just devastating because the family lost
the eldest son; his death completely damned any prospect of the Smith
family getting out of poverty.

They were poor partly through their own fault, and Jo’s dad being an
alcoholic and a moronic businessman certainly exacerbated these
problems. But the story they told themselves about why they were poor
was that people kept cheating them for no reason. They’d gotten cheated
on the ginseng deal, and then Russell Stoddard had cheated them out of
their farm. When people speculate with excess wealth, they don’t often
run into danger of losing their only home or not feeding their family.
But, when people like the Smiths speculate with the little money they
need to feed themselves, the way BDC did, they’re gambling with money
they don’t have and the losses are far more immense and acutely felt.

Jo’s figured out that the only time he’d really made good for his family
was when he was the one doing the cheating. You’re either the cheater or
the cheated, so he made a career out of cheating people for the rest of
his life.

In 1824, just 2 years after Harriet Tubman was born, a Christian revival
rolled through town. This wasn’t uncommon as many preachers had,
essentially, celebrity status. Now, if you will, dear listener, picture
the scene. Joseph Smith at the age of 18 knows nothing but poverty and
all the social consequences attendant with being stuck in the cycle of
poverty. During this revival, a well-dressed man spends hours expounding
on Bible passages to a crowd of hundreds. He seems very comfortable, the
townfolk greet him eagerly and he pays them nothing but smiles and a few
hours of sharing his wealth of knowledge. He’s not only well-dressed but
well respected. After he finishes his hours of preaching, a collection
plate passes around the crowd and people pull money out of their pockets
and put it in the plate. By the time the plate hits the end of the crowd
there’s possibly a few hundred dollars there. The preacher takes that
money and thanks the people, telling them their offerings to the Lord
are the widow’s mite and they’ll be blessed for it. Then, the guy hops
in a chartered carriage and moves onto the next town to repeat the
cycle.

For a young man growing up in poverty to see revival preachers with
tailored suits and their entourages of followers fawning over them, it
must have had a dramatic impact on Jo. Jo was on the precipice of
manhood when he’d be expected to marry, have children, and provide for
his family, all while helping out his aging parents and younger siblings
because Alvin was gone. Sitting in the congregation and watching that
collection plate circulate the crowd with enough money to keep the Smith
family fed for months, what a dream it would be to have that coming to
young Jo instead of the finely-clothed priestcraft on the stage. It’s in
this context that he supposedly had his famous “first vision,” in which
God appeared to him in a pillar of light “above the brightness of the
son” and planted the seeds of the idea to start a new religion.

These visionary experiences were incredibly common at the time because
this was the burned-over district during the Second Great Awakening.
Rick Grunder, a historian and rare book collector, published in the late
2000s a book titled Mormon Parallels, which documents well over 2000
pages of what the title says; parallels to Jo’s story and theology. From
Grunder’s introduction:

> Most of the seeds of Joseph Smith’s texts and prophecies enjoyed
> popular cultural dissemination in forms familiar to non-Mormons before
> they grew into scripture of the latter day. In surprising depth and
> degree, much of what Mormonism presents as if it were its own,
> actually flourished at various levels of society before Joseph Smith
> declared it. Enough solid evidence of this is now documented in
> relialbe modern Mormon parallels, reasonably to suggest the presence -
> in Joseph Smith’s natural environment - of the small portions that
> remain for us to discover.

Throughout this work we see hundreds of stories with similar tendencies
to Jo’s first vision. Grunder also notes in his introduction that
“Joseph went to his grave only pledging - never delivering - the
great, organic whole \[of Platonic theology\].” Indeed, “Joseph’s
doctrinal pilgrimage was not direct progress from truth to
further-enlightening truth. Just as often, it was modern scripture
contradicting modern scripture, revelation changing revelation… Joseph
progressed along roads that were already well-traveled, and varied.”
Grunder here, taps into a concept worth highlighting. As Jo attended
this 1824 revival among others, he wasn’t just realizing how posh the
life of circuit-rider preacher could be, he was scoping out the
potential market competition. If Jo was to compete, he must be more. If
he was to rise above, he must be greater. If he was to take headlines,
he must be more controversial. If he was to garner a following, he must
be a better leader than others. More, more, MORE\! Jo’s experiences
throughout the early to mid 1820s shaped his mind into what he would
become.

Meanwhile he made a little money as a treasure digger, and one of these
stories he told was about a gold Bible. You want to stand out from all
the other preachers, your claims have to be truly remarkable, even to
the point of unbelievable. A rich farmer named Martin Harris,
Not-So-Smarty-Marty, as we call him, was a bit of a religious nut and
got excited about the gold Bible story. Jo experimented a little bit by
asking Marty to help him out with $50 for the project, and Marty forked
it over. How Jo did it is quintessential conman. He knew Marty was rich
so he walked up to Marty and said that god told him the first honest man
he met that day would give him $50. Either Marty gives him the money or
he’s not an honest man. The manipulation tactics were so simple, yet so
effective.

Now Jo knew he had a sucker on the line, and he reeled him in. He
received a revelation asking Marty to pay the full cost of printing
5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, to the tune of $3,000. In order to
come up with the money, Marty mortgaged his farm. Jo promised to pay him
back out of the profits from book sales. Jo set the retail price of the
book at $1.75, and if they had all sold at the price then there would
have been $5700 to split as profit. $1.75 was a big ask though, when
most books at the time could be picked up used for a penny or two. But
the books didn’t sell, they had to drop the price, and Jo decided Marty
was too wicked to be entitled to a share of the profits anyway, so Marty
never did get his money back, and eventually lost the farm and his
abused wife in the process. Good for her. Eps 3, 4, 95. Once the
religion started, the surplus of Books of Mormon ended up being traded
as a commodity themselves. Jo’s first counterfeit money was actually a
counterfeit history book he claimed was scripture.

Jo wrote the Book of Mormon and started to get it printed, but then
Marty got cold feet about making the final payment to the printer.
That’s when Jo received BoC 16, modern D\&C 19: “thou shalt not covet
thine own property, but impart it freely to the printing of the book of
Mormon.” Marty again obeyed this commandment and forked over the money.
Not long after this, Jo received another revelation about money. In the
so-called “Canadian copyright revelation,” Jo commanded some men to go
to Canada to sell the Book of Mormon’s Canadian copyright for some quick
cash, because God had decided to let them all enjoy the “temporal
blessings” of the holy work. The mission failed, and Jo ended up having
to retract the revelation and admit that it was either “of man” or “of
the devil.” The text of the revelation was probably destroyed if it ever
was written down in the first place so all we have is later statements
of the men who went to Canada.

Once the Book of Mormon was understood to be a flop and wouldn’t make Jo
the money he was always chasing, a new strategy had to be devised. He
started to realize that the Book of Mormon wasn’t going to make him a
million bucks, but it might make him a million followers. Guess what
followers have? Money. More followers makes more money, especially if
tithing becomes a requirement. But he also realized that he had allowed
some of his followers a little too much authority and a little too much
freedom to challenge him. If you’re going to run a successful con, you
have to CONtrol the situation. You see what I did there?... I’ll see
myself out.

Jo had to deal with logistical constraints of the con. He made a few
bold claims. You can tell people that you speak for god and when a few
people believe you then, hey, life’s pretty great. But, when you claim
that you translated an ancient history of Christian Israelite settlers
of America from a book made of gold, people are going to ask questions.
If you show the mark a set of forged metal plates, you have to be able
to control his access by hiding it under a sheet, you have to be able to
control his interpretation by describing the object to him, and you have
to be able to control what he is and is not allowed to say to other
people about the experience. You can’t let the mark investigate too much
or ask too many questions, or your story may start to fall apart. The
number of questions has to be limited because the answers to those
questions have to go just far enough to let the phrase “you just have to
have faith” pick up the slack, but not far enough that a person will ask
more questions you can’t answer.

Pretty early on, Jo started establishing total control over his
followers. It began before he even made the plates. In the early 1820s,
Jo thought he might partner with other local treasure diggers.
Apparently he promised them shares of the golden plates, but then he cut
them out. After he claimed to have obtained the plates, they ransacked
his parents’ barn in an attempt to find them and get their rightful
share. In fact, the seer stone that Smith used to locate and then
translate the plates was “borrowed” from a neighbor named Willard Chase,
who found the stone while digging a well. When Chase asked Jo to return
the stone, Jo refused. Jo also once showed a magician named Samuel
Lawrence where the plates were buried, and Lawrence viewed the plates
through his own seer stone and noticed some “spectacles” buried there
too. Jo incorporated the spectacles into his story-- they eventually
became the “Urim and Thummim”-- but he also feared that he’d lost
control of the narrative by bringing in Lawrence. He dropped Lawrence
from the project and claimed that he had shown him the wrong spot. Ep 9.

After he made the plates and authored the Book of Mormon, Jo went
through a similar process of consolidating power over his religious
followers. Initially he made it sound like everyone could receive
revelation just like him, and maybe he would allow some of his followers
to collaborate with him in founding and leading a church. But then he
started to feel like he was losing control again, and he changed his
tune. Eps 8, 18, 19, 22. This began a pattern in Jo’s ministry. He would
grant offices within the church which retained some level of autonomy
and control. As soon as people within those offices overstepped Jo’s
arbitrary boundaries he’d walk back their power or he’d manufacture a
new office above them and place himself in that new elevated position.
Eps 23, 25.

In June 1829, the year Andrew Jackson was inaugurated, Joseph Smith
received a revelation for David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery, two of his
closest followers, telling them that “I speak unto you, even as unto
Paul mine apostle, for you are called even with that same calling with
which he was called.” Now, that’s interesting for a couple reasons.
First, because neither David nor Oliver had been ordained to the office
of apostle. In fact, the Apostle Paul in the New Testament wasn’t
ordained either, and in Galatians he made a big point of the fact that
he didn’t *need* to be ordained, so the comparison of Oliver and David
to Paul implies that they have authority without any need for
ordination. And secondly, the comparison to Paul also implies that David
and Oliver have the authority to write scripture, just like Paul did.

In fact, Oliver didn’t just *believe* he could receive written
revelations; he actually did receive some. According to an early convert
named Ezra Booth who left the Church in 1831, Oliver “did in fact, issue
some \[written\] productions, which he said bore the Divine impress; but
Smith fixed upon them the stamp of devilish.” As a sort of compromise,
Smith told Cowdery he

> was permitted to "*speak* or to teach, at all times, by way of
> commandment unto the Church: but not to *write* them by way of
> commandment;" thus Cowdery is authorized to give verbal commandments
> to the Church by the inspiration of the spirit, which, if he
> afterwards writes, ceases to be inspiration; therefore, a commandment
> delivered orally, may be divinely inspired; but the same communicated,
> written verbatim, so far loses its former character, that it
> degenerates into a production of an infernal stamp. Here is a mystery,
> for aught I know, peculiar to Mormonism; and none but Mormonites, I
> presume, will attempt to unravel it.

Oliver Cowdery, Cowdung Allover… yeah, still not proud of that one, was
briefly given Jo’s blessing to write scripture. As soon as it became a
threat to Jo’s power, and Jo’s blessing was revoked. Ep 22. There’s a
finite amount of power within any social structure like this and Jo
wanted the power all to himself.

Some revelations written by David Whitmer’s brother-in-law Hiram Page
also contributed to Smith’s crackdown. At this point in his career, Jo
was receiving all of his revelations through that seer stone that he had
stolen from Willard Chase. Jo often talked about the stone as if the
power of revelation resided in the stone, not in himself. Oddly enough,
Jo’s early movement showed some democratic tendencies as he also
insisted that anyone had the right to such a stone if they could find
one. This became a problem because Hiram Page had a stone of his own,
and he started producing written revelations for the Church.

We don’t know much about Hiram Page’s revelations, except that they gave
instructions regarding the order of the Church and the location of Zion,
the New Jerusalem, and Jo considered them to be “entirely at variance”
with his own revelations. In Doctrine and Covenants 28, which Jo
received in September 1830, he commanded that “no one shall be appointed
to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my
servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses.”
Everyone else was just a spokesman like Moses’s brother, appointed to
parrot his words to the rest of the Church. Jo declared Page’s
revelations Satanic and had them burned and Page’s seer stone destroyed
by grinding it into dust and scattering it to the wind. To add insult to
injury, he commanded Oliver Cowdery to be the one to deliver the verdict
to Hiram Page, Ollie’s brother-in-law. Jo had slapped down Oliver, and
now he made Oliver be the one to slap down Hiram Page. Talk about
manipulative. Jo really knew how to break a person’s spirit and crush a
revolt, which would serve him well as his church grew and expanded. Eps
8, 23.

To bring us into the Kirtland period, let’s look at one more example. In
late 1830, a small group of missionaries including Oliver Cowdery and
Parley Parker Pratt, who we call P-cubed, converted a Baptist
congregation in Kirtland. Jo moved there in early 1831 and made it his
new Church headquarters, quickly establishing dominance over the former
Baptists and relegating their former minister, Hingepin Sidney Rigdon,
to the same “spokesman” role that he’d given Cowdery and Whitmer. Ep 24.

Once Jo teamed up with Hingepin Sidney Rigdon, everything accelerated.
Rigdon’s followers, by in large, converted to Jo’s church, providing a
much-needed membership injection of restorationists hell-bent on
building Zion, the new Jerusalem. With great membership comes great
responsibility and Jo needed to create new roles to rein in these new
converts.

Kirtland got a little bit wild before Jo arrived, with lots of people
“getting the power” and receiving revelations and such. We’ll discuss
this more on episode 3 of our series, where we’ll discuss that which is
delicious to the taste and desirable. There was one girl named Laura
Hubble whom Rigdon had recognized as a prophetess and “literally saluted
her with what they called the kiss of charity.” That’s according to Ezra
Booth. When Jo arrived in February 1831, he “declared her an imposter”
and received a revelation that’s now D\&C 43, reiterating that Jo was
the only one appointed to receive commandments for the Church, and that
“none else shall be appointed unto this gift except it be through
him.” Even if he became a fallen prophet and lost his gift, the
revelation gave him sole authority to appoint his replacement. In other
words, the Church is accountable only to Jo, and Jo is accountable only
to God. No exceptions, period, full stop. Power grabs like this became
common as Jo’s empire expanded and he greedily aspired to the ultimate
leadership position.

Soon after his arrival to Kirtland, Jo firmly established the principle
that only he was allowed to receive written revelations for the Church
and that the other Church leaders were just his salespeople-- sorry, his
*spokespeople*. But he hadn’t really justified or institutionalized his
power yet, so that became his primary focus early on in Kirtland. Eps
19, 22, 24, 25.

Now, Mormon theology today divides the priesthood into two orders:
Aaronic and Melchizedek. According to Joseph Smith’s 1838 history, Jo
and Ollie first learned about these two priesthoods in May 1829. First,
the biblical John the Baptist appeared as a resurrected angel to the two
men and ordained them to the lesser, or Aaronic, priesthood. Then, some
undetermined time later, the biblical disciples Peter, James, and John
also appeared as resurrected angels and ordained Jo and Ollie to the
higher, or Melchizedek, priesthood. If you’ve ever been a member of the
LDS Church, you probably know this story. What you probably don’t know
is that it never happened; Jo made it up later, which is really funny
because this discrepancy in the historical record has caused a lot of
headaches for apologists who need the full priesthood restoration to
have occurred in 1829.

What happened in May 1829 is that Jo and Ollie baptized each other and
ordained each other to the office of elder. That’s it. No John the
Baptist, no Peter, James, and John, no greater and lesser priesthood.
Those were all later fabrications. Every time Jo retold this story, he
added more details and embellishments that eventually transformed the
story into what it is today. Those offices and arbitrary lines between
priesthoods, the high priesthood, apostles, all the hierarchical
structure of the church today evolved slowly out of necessity, spurned
by Jo’s desire to stay on the highest level of his expanding religious
pyramid. According to early Mormon apostles David Whitmer and William E.
McLellin, these details did not exist in the earliest versions. They
weren’t even apostles until after Zion’s camp in 1834, eps 30, 31. In an
1885 interview, D-day David Whitmer said, “I never heard that an angel
had ordained Joseph and Oliver to the Aaronic priesthood until the year
1834, 5, or 6.” And in a couple letters from the 1870s, William E.
McLellin said that despite having heard JS tell the story of the
Church’s founding some 20 times, “I never heard of john the Baptist
ordaining Joseph and Oliver. I heard not of James, Peter, and John doing
so.” “Today, I do not believe the story.”

Right there we have our first red flag contradicting Joe and Ollie's
claims of angelic priesthood ordinations. This priesthood restoration
supposedly happened 5 years before D-Day David Whitmer first heard about
them in Ohio in 1834, but nothing was said about this until 1834? Ollie
and Joe supposedly had an angel of God, the same angel that baptized
Jesus, descend from heaven and ordain them to the AP by laying his
ghostly hands on their heads. Then after that, P, J\&J, the three
biggest heavy hitter apostles of Jesus, supposedly descended and
ordained Ollie and Joe to the MP. Joe and Ollie had personal experiences
with the 4 most important people in all of Christology, aside from Jesus
himself, and didn't think it was necessary to mention it to D-Day on
their week long journey from Harmony to Fayette, a mere two weeks after
it reportedly happened? If it really did go down this way, wouldn't that
be the only thing that Joe and Ollie could talk about for the entire
move? This was supposed to be the event that the literal entirety of
Mormon authority comes from, and they just forgot to mention it? Just
slipped their minds?\! Are you serious?\! Apologists claim that Jo
tailored the story to different audiences for different purposes and
that the event was simply too sacred to tell some folks, milk before
meat and all that nonsense, but these were two guys in the
highest-ranking offices in the church and absolutely no contemporary
record mentions it until the mid-1830s.

Now, you may say, Bryce, I read about these angelic ordinations in
Joseph Smith’s history, that’s in the Pearl of Great Price, that’s
scripture, are you insinuating that Mormon scripture is somehow flawed?
I read about it in Doctrine and Covenants too\! Section 27 includes a
long description of the angelic ordinations. And the revelation is dated
August 1830, so that proves that story dates to earlier than 1830,
right? Great, Whitmer and McLellin made a mistake and Jo is vindicated\!
You’re an anti-Mormon, Bryce\! Yeah, sure, that’s cool. One thing,
though… Everything in Section 27 about the angelic ordinations was added
to the revelation years later. Jo also added lines to Section 7. MyBoM
eps 101, 110. Yeah, Joseph Smith quietly went back and edited *divine
revelations supposedly from God* to match whatever latest lie he was
telling. Mormons get super offended when people say “Oh my god\!”
because that’s taking the Lord’s name in vain. How vain do you have to
be to say I’m speaking for god and he said this one thing and then go
back and change what goddamn god said years after he said it to make a
lie true?\! The arrogance is appalling\! And you wonder why other
Christians think Joseph Smith was an anti-Christ.

This revisionism definitely caused problems for Jo, because Professor
Bill McLellin, D-day David Whitmer, and Ollie Cowdery all eventually
left the Church. Well… left the church or were excommunicated and told
they had 2 days to leave town or the Danites would be waiting outside
their door. Ep 43. They noticed that Jo was doing things like changing
the revelations and making up new priesthoods. So why bother going to
all this trouble? Why did Jo take that risk? Simple: he had to explain
from where his authority came. If it came from him and Oliver mutually
bapturbating and ordaining each other elder, then it’s really hard to
justify the idea that Jo has special authority and everyone else needs
to get that authority from him. Priesthood keys aren’t very useful if
all doors are opened with the same key. But, even today, every man in
the church when they’re given the priesthood gets their certificate
which traces their priesthood back to that day in 1829, even though it
was a later fabrication. It’s a lie because Jo was jealous of his power.

But if it came from resurrected biblical apostles, and there are
structured priesthood “orders” with Jo at the head, well, that makes Jo
the conduit to authority. And the hierarchy of priesthood offices
becomes a kind of authority ladder that you can only climb if you show
fealty to the one true prophet.

Jo’s insatiable palette for power was merely one aspect of his avarice,
but money was also central to his plot. Money was what this was about
from the beginning and with power comes money; the two concepts go
disturbingly hand in hand. Jo hatched all sorts of money-making schemes
during his time in Kirtland, Ohio, mostly because he was addicted to
shopping on credit.

For instance, Jo built the Kirtland Temple on credit at a cost of about
$40,000. To pay for it, he opened a mercantile store and bought
$80,000-$90,000 worth of store goods on credit in New York. He also
built a steam mill and bought a bunch of expensive farms. These
businesses all eventually failed. To cover all these losses, Jo
introduced a kind of socialism to the Church, asking people to sign over
all of their property to Church ownership and to work their own farms as
stewards. He also extracted donations from the members at every
opportunity, and he sent missionaries out to bring people to Kirtland,
then sold city lots to the new arrivals at more than what he paid for
them. Jo was a terrible businessman and no amount of money was ever
enough.

Even bleeding the parishioners dry of nearly every cent they could
muster wasn’t enough, because let’s be honest: most of them were dirt
poor to begin with and that was before the Jo scourge hit Kirtland. Yet
Jo continued to spend money he didn’t have. At a time when the Church
was somewhere between $40-60,000 in debt, Jo spent $8,000 to hire a
Hebrew teacher to teach a 7-week course. A carpenter at the time made
about $1 a day, maybe $1.50; Jo paid this Hebrew teacher more like $163
a day. That was an insane amount of money in 1836. He also bought some
Egyptian mummies and papyri for about $2,400, which was about $2,000
more than their assessed price. These mummies and Papyri proved to be
one of Jo’s greatest blunders, because he declared these papyri to be
the writings of Abraham and Joseph before he actually bought them, which
gave the broker, Michael Chandler, leverage to charge a lot more money.
Fortunately for Jo, he was able just borrow the $2400 from a couple of
his followers and never pay it back. As the church neared 1835, these
patterns were becoming incredibly taxing and burdensome. 1835 is also
the year Charles Darwin landed on the Galapagos Islands\!

But all the debt added up, and the church edged towards bankruptcy by
1836. You can’t run a church without any money, and when that church has
an overall debt gap of over $1 million of today’s currency, with no way
of bouncing back, no exports, and no way to vastly increase tithing
income, we’re really looking at some serious problems. Jo got desperate,
and what he did next to help with the money problem was a last ditch
effort which failed spectacularly. Here’s Ebenezer Robinson’s account of
what happened from his autobiography:

> “A brother in the Church, by the name of Burgess, had come to Kirtland
> and stated that a large amount of money had been secreted in the
> cellar of a certain house in Salem, Massachusetts, which had belonged
> to a widow, and he thought he was the only person now living who had
> knowledge of it, or to the location of the house. ... His statement
> was credited by the Brethren, and steps were taken to try and secure
> the treasure. … We soon learned that four of the leading men of the
> Church had been to Salem, Massachusetts, in search of the hidden
> treasure spoken of by Brother Burgess, viz: Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum
> Smith, Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery. They left home on the 25th of
> July, and returned in September.”

That’s right. Jo traveled hundreds of miles over more than two months to
chase a story of buried treasure. How classic Jo is that?... According
to Robinson,

> “We were informed that Brother Burgess met them in Salem
> \[Massachusetts\], evidently according to appointment, but time had
> wrought such a change that he could not for a certainty point out the
> house, and soon left. They however, found a house which they felt was
> the right one, and hired it. It is needless to say they failed to find
> that treasure, or the other gold and silver spoken of in the
> revelation.”

After failing to get the treasure, Jo received a revelation in which God
told him the divine purpose of the trip hadn’t been to get worldly
treasure, but to get spiritual treasure. “Concern not yourselves about
your debts, for I will give you power to pay them,” the Lord said. Jo
hung out in Salem for a month to do some missionary work to allay the
embarrassment of having made this trip for nothing, and then he returned
home.

Jo the treasure-digger got hoodwinked by a treasure digger. Burgess was
hired by Joe, using church funds while it was hopelessly in debt, to
help them find buried treasure to pay off that debt. Jo and friends made
the trip, went digging around without finding a single shekel, while
spending a fair amount of money to live in Salem for a month. Merely ten
years after Jo fraudulently told Bossman Josiah Stowell he knew where
hidden buried treasure was and got himself hired to help find it, this
guy Burgess did the same thing to Jo and his friends. Sometimes history
gives us these little gems of poetic justice through irony. Ep 35.

Robinson ends his discussion of this incident by saying, “Failing to
secure the Salem \[Massachusetts\] treasure, and no demand for city
lots, with their debts pressing heavily upon them, it evidently seemed
necessary that some ways and means should be devised to extricate
themselves from their present embarrassments. To this end a banking
institution was organized, called the ‘Kirtland Safety Society.’”
Whether out of anger for the failure in this treasure-diggin trip, or
simply conceived of through desperation, the Kirtland Safety Society,
also known as the Kirtland Bank, was formed.

The Kirtland Bank got its start on November 2, 1836. That’s the same
year Thomas Crapper was born\! When people say they’re going to the
crapper, that guy was the reason, even though the word “crap” didn’t
originate with him, it’s just… a crappy coincidence... According to the
History of the Church vol. 2, on that date “the brethren at Kirtland
drew up certain articles of agreement, preparatory to the organization
of a banking institution, to be called the ‘Kirtland Safety Society.’
President Oliver Cowdery was delegated to Philadelphia to procure plates
for the institution; and Elder Orson Hyde to repair to Columbus with a
petition to the legislature of Ohio, for an act of incorporation, which
was presented at an early period of their session, but because we were
‘Mormons’ the legislature raised some frivolous excuse on which they
refused to grant us those banking privileges they so freely granted to
others. Thus Elder Hyde was compelled to return without accomplishing
the object of his mission, while Elder Cowdery succeeded at a great
expense in procuring the plates, and bringing them to Kirtland.”

The Mormons are desperately poor, Jo’s running out of credit, and bills
are way overdue. Jo decides to found a bank, and the first thing he does
is send Oliver Cowdery off to Philadelphia to get some printers’ plates
done up for printing money. By the way, there are rumors about Jo’s
family having been involved in counterfeiting money all the way back to
Vermont, so it’s fully possible that he was trying to take the family
money-printing business legit with a state-recognized bank charter. The
legislature’s decision to deny the bank a charter caused some problems.
Cowdery had bought these expensive metal printing plates that said
“Kirtland Safety Society Bank,” but they had been denied a legal
charter for a bank. In fact, according to Ebenezer Robinson, Cowdery
returned to Kirtland with not only the printing plates, but also with
$200,000 worth of bank bills already printed, “which would be worthless
unless some way could be devised by which they could be used.” It was
illegal to print money without a charter, and the state denied it and Jo
REALLY needs money, he ALWAYS needs more money, he can never have enough
money\!

So, how did they solve the problem? One of these geniuses came up with a
plan to have their counterfeit cake and eat it too. They just
incorporated their company as the “Kirtland Safety Society
*Anti*-Bank*ing Company*,” and they hand-stamped “*Anti*” before
“Banking” and “*ing Co.*” after “Bank” on every single bank note.
Boom\! Two hundred thousand dollars worth of anti-bank notes, redeemable
at your local anti-bank. They weren’t printing money, they were simply
printing certificates which were as good as money as long as the bank
remained solvent and had enough capital specie to cover all the printed
money… Buuuuuuut… that would quickly become a problem because they
didn’t have any investment capital; Jo and his buddies only had debt,
which isn’t a great place from which to start a business, especially a
bank… or anti bank ing company.

The articles of agreement for the anti-bank are absolutely hilarious.
They declared the capital stock of the bank to be worth not less than $4
million… IN 1836\!, which is about $108 million of 2020 money. They just
wrote on a piece of paper that they had more than a tenth of a billion
dollars and expected people to invest with that promise. Can you imagine
going on Shark Tank and telling the sharks you’re starting a bank with
no capital, tons of debt, and you want them to buy in at a $4 million
valuation? Are you serious? The articles also allowed the bank’s 7
directors, including Jo, to be compensated without limit. Also,
stockholders in the bank could at any time be required by the directors
to pay in more money, which was really pretty exploitative, especially
when Prophet Jo was telling all his followers to invest in the bank
because it was God’s bank and would “swallow up all other banks on
earth.” That’s a quote. The whole Kirtland bank is such a unique and
incredible confluence of desperation, ignorance coupled with idiocy,
deliberate dishonest, and fraud all driven by gluttony of money. It’s
such a remarkable time of Mormon history and these guys knew what they
were doing.

Kind of like an investor who bought into Enron in August 2000, Jo
managed to start a bank just when the nation was “peak bank” and heading
into the Panic of 1837, when hundreds of private banks collapsed. In
March 1837, President Andrew Jackson announced that the US federal
government would no longer accept paper money from private banks for
purchasing land. This devalued the paper money issued by private banks
and caused a run on banks across the country, with people trying to
redeem their paper bank notes for gold and silver coins. Lots of banks
went out of business because they didn’t have enough specie, and holders
of their bank notes lost everything. This was massively deflationary and
sent the country into a 7-year depression. Ep 38.

In Kirtland, the crisis was made worse by the fact that some of the
Church’s top leaders, including David Whitmer, Jacob Bump, and Warren
Parrish, decided Jo was a false prophet because he had prophesied that
the bank could never fail; this in addition to a number of other events
like the Fanny Alger incident and Jo’s handling of the Missouri crisis,
among others. These guys went around collecting bank notes and taking
them to the bank to redeem them for gold and silver. Jo cut his losses
by resigning his directorship and putting a couple of fall guys in
charge, and then he denied all responsibility for the bank’s failure.

The dissenters obviously didn’t buy it. Lyman Johnson, Orson Pratt, and
Warren Parrish brought charges against Jo and Sidney Rigdon in the high
council for lying and extortion, among other things. Parley P. Pratt
gave a sermon railing against Jo for his sins. Creditors and law
enforcement officers also started to come after Jo to collect on his
debts. Jo eventually got all the dissenting apostles excommunicated. By
the end of 1837 about 40-50 dissenters had been excommunicated,
including Book of Mormon investor Martin Harris. Even not-so-smarty
Marty, who got suckered into funding the Book of Mormon, recognized the
Kirtland Bank as a money-making scam. The dissenters founded their own
church called the Church of Christ. They still believed in the Book of
Mormon, but they rejected Prophet Jo. His own leadership essentially
excommunicated Jo from their new Kirtland church after forming it.

Jo won the struggle for control of the Church, but he lost the struggle
for control of the temple, which got foreclosed and turned over to the
Church of Christ. He also lost the struggle for control of the city. A
court fined Jo and Rigdon each $1000 for illegal banking practices, and
a an angry mob burned down the Church’s printing office. At least,
that’s how the story is told. Far more salacious and disturbing
version of events also exist. A man named Grandison Newell, who was owed
a lot of money by Jo, claimed that Jo had attempted to assassinate him.
The printing office also didn’t burn down until it had transferred
ownership in the courts and a guy in the early 1900s claims his dad was
instructed by the prophet to burn the press building down to keep it
from falling in the hands of apostates. It was a chaotic time in
Kirtland for the prophet so he and Hingepin Rigdon fled Kirtland on
December 22 under the cover of night and went to Far West, Missouri,
where there was another branch of the Church, in a wagon that Jo’s
faithful henchman Bloody Brigham Young had appropriated from a Church
member.

From Kirtland to Missouri was a move spurned by desperation and death
threats. Missouri had a larger church than what existed in Kirtland and
Jo’s lust for power upon his arrival in Missouri resulted in numerous
excommunications, restructurings of the leadership, and Jo beginning to
write his own history.

We won’t spend a lot of time in Missouri, because Jo wasn’t there for
very long and we’ll have plenty more to say about this period in future
episodes within this series. But the main things you need to know are
that before Jo arrived, the Missouri Mormons had had years of conflict
with the non-Mormon citizens, who had pushed the Mormons out of several
different counties. Finally they had cut a deal that the Mormons would
stay in Caldwell County, and they could have that county all to
themselves as long as they didn’t go try to settle neighboring counties.
That truce held until Joseph Smith arrived and immediately decided to
break the truce and to start settling neighboring Daviess County.

William Swartzell, one of the settlers sent to Daviess County,
complained about the unfair way that land was allocated there. Church
leaders got first pick of the land allocations, and “the least among the
brethren were the least noticed and got the least land.” He also
complained that the law of consecration made it impossible for anyone to
leave the Church if they had doubts, because if you left then you
forfeited all of the property you had signed over to the Church, and you
left destitute and penniless. The law of consecration made this an
inevitable result. Once all your property is owned by the church, or
consecrated to the bishop’s storehouse, it remains in the possession of
the church. This may have been the most brazenly greedy of all Jo’s
revelations.

The Mormons’ decision to break their promise to stay in Caldwell County
led to a big fistfight in Daviess County on election day, when the
Mormon settlers turned out to vote as a bloc for their favorite
political candidates, and the non-Mormon citizens tried to stop them.
The fight escalated into a war, and as part of that war, Mormon troops
looted and burned the non-Mormon towns of Gallatin and Millport in
Daviess County. When the Mormon soldiers first arrived in these towns,
they claimed to have found them abandoned, the citizens supposedly
having fled. According to Apostle Thomas B. Marsh, “The prophet, on
hearing the property was left, commenced a reply, and said: ‘we had
better see to it.’ . . . The same evening a number of footmen came up
from the direction of Mill Port laden with property which I was informed
consisted of beds, clocks and other household furniture. . . . During
the same time, a company, called the Fur Company, were sent out to bring
in fat hogs and cattle, calling the hogs, bears, and the cattle
buffaloes.” Ep 44.

Granted, this was war time, and stuff like this happens in a war. Also,
a lot of new Mormon immigrants had arrived, and they needed food. But
I’m not sure that justifies burning the towns and stealing things like
clocks and furniture. The same people who would defend Jo’s actions here
would probably also condemn the recent rioters who looted a Target after
the death of George Floyd, even though there were similar forces at
play. Notably, though, they had scriptural justification for these
actions, so that’s a pretty significant difference from what we see in
mid-2020. Jo’s revelation from 1832 stating that the property of the
gentiles will be consecrated to the church gave these holy warriors all
the reason they needed to burn, plunder, and pillage their sinful
gentile neighbors. Eps 45, 46, 47.

This all resulted in the surrender of the Mormon twin cities of Far West
and Adam Ondi-Ahmen, which we’ll also discuss in coming episodes of this
series. This landed Jo, Hyrum, and many other church leaders in Liberty
Jail and other Missouri prisons for months. Governor Lilburn Boggs
signed the extermination order and the next Mormon mass-exodus
commenced, this time to the receptive arms of Illinois where they
eventually built their own city, Nauvoo.

When Jo arrived at what would become Nauvoo after his escape from
Missouri, he almost immediately started in with the land speculation.
The Mormons needed a home and if he could make some money off them in
the process, that’s just gravy. He bought huge swaths of land on both
sides of the Mississippi with the intention of turning around and
selling it back to Mormon converts who immigrated to Nauvoo. Jo and the
other church leaders didn’t purchase and lay out just one town site;
they purchased and laid out several town sites. This was a very
ambitious real estate scheme with one massive flaw. Jo didn’t actually
have any capital, he made these purchases on a 20-year payment plan with
no down payment, at interest of about 8% per year, He also apparently
traded away some unwanted land deeds from Missouri and Ohio. Beyond
that, the Mormons had just been removed from their homes in Missouri and
were exponentially destitute from the events of the previous 3 years
tracing all the way back to the Kirtland Banking Company. How do you
build a city and make money on nothing more than credit off the backs of
poor refugees? Jo showed us that it could be done, but that only the
most short-sighted of plans could keep it running. There were no grand
plans which would posture Nauvoo as an economic powerhouse he dreamed it
would become. It had the location and industrious population to make it
happen, but the ability to execute any long-term plans quickly fell away
when short term plans proved more appealing or provided speedier
gratification to the prophet and his pseudo-wealthy elite. Like a
country running on a multi-trillion dollar deficit and handing half a
trillion dollars to 500 extremely wealthy people, that bill is going to
come due eventually.

According to Jo, “When I made the purchase of White and Galland, there
were one Stone house, three frame houses, and two block houses, which
constituted the whole city . . . and the place was literally a
wilderness.” So he probably thought he was getting in cheap and laying
the groundwork to sell at higher prices once settlers started arriving
and driving up property values. But in reality, he drastically overpaid
for much of this land. For some added context, at this time the average
price for land was between $2.50-13 per acre nationwide. In one
purchase, from Horace Hotchkiss, the divinely inspired Prophet Joseph
Smith agreed to pay around $229 per acre. He paid around 32 times the
expected market value at most generous estimates. Another purchase, from
Isaac Galland, may not even have been legal, because the deeds were
disputed. Eps 53, 56, 95.

Part of Jo’s plan to finance the land purchases was to lobby Congress
for reparations for the persecution in Missouri. In 1839 he sent the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on a mission to England to get more
converts to bring in more tithing, and had them stop along the way in
Washington, D.C. to deliver petitions. He and his brother Hyrum Smith
each believed they should receive a $100,000 for what they had been
through. But of course no reparations ever materialized. Side note: the
apostles didn’t take much money with them, so they had to beg from the
poor members along their route in order to pay for passage. Eps 57, 58,
61.

While the Apostles were headed on this crucial mission, Jo improved the
area around his own house on Water street very first. If he was indeed
the altruistic prophet for the people he claimed to be, he would be
living in a shack until every other Mormon had a brick home, but he did
the exact opposite. He knew what was going on too. He knew he was
speculating on land values and the people knew it just as much as him.
These business deals may have been sold as divine providence, but
anybody with a brain in their skull knew Jo was speculating on land and
these land speculators from which he was purchasing the land were
largely setting Nauvoo’s economic trajectory on a disaster path to serve
their own love of money. Everybody was trying to get rich quick in the
earliest days of Nauvoo by foisting hundreds of thousands in debt on the
backs of the destitute Mormon refugees. You have to be a special kind of
malevolent to profiteer off this much pain and suffering.

The thing is, Jo wasn’t crazy to be optimistic about real estate prices.
The Mormons had a golden opportunity to turn Nauvoo into a sprawling
metropolis with unrivaled access to the largest shipping river in the
United States and realize an incredible potential to become the next
biggest manufacturing center in the state of Illinois. Add into that the
fact that Nauvoo was surrounded by fertile farmland to sustain the
population and a bunch of land speculators had Nauvoo slated as the next
Chicago with the massive influx of Mormon population. A lot of people,
including the prophet, had a realistic optimism for the future of the
city and the money they’d make with Nauvoo growing so quickly. For
comparison, the population of Chicago on the 1840 census was just under
4.5k, whereas Nauvoo ticked in at a cool 2.5k. Nauvoo briefly surpassed
Chicago in population with the influx of Mormon refugees climbing that
population to around 12-15k by 1845.

However, Nauvoo’s population was mostly too poor to pay the high prices
Jo was asking to recoup his costs and pay his debts. The perpetual state
of poverty Jo had run the Mormons and the church at large into wasn’t an
easy hole to dig themselves out of, and that state of poverty was a dark
cloud overhanging the Mormons’ every moment during the struggling years
of the Nauvoo settlement. Buying land with regular specie for the
average Mormon was completely impossible, so credit was extended to them
by Jo who was operating on nothing but credit himself. The Mormons
beginning their settlement efforts were already running in the red, and
they constructed their settlements on top of an ever-growing mountain of
debt. Understandably, Jo used the land in his possession to issue favors
to those who showed fealty to him. He exchanged choice property for
demonstrations of loyalty like any good mafia boss.

Understandably, Jo just giving land to his buddies in exchange for goods
or services led to extremely volatile land prices because Jo might pay
one guy an acre for a couple bushels of corn and another guy would be
paid an acre for a few weeks’ worth of working construction for the
church. Jo’s hunger for money also made it so he frequently placed
himself as a middleman in every possible transaction. If any transaction
going on around town could be brokered through land he owned, he stood
to make a little money from it and he’d seize the opportunity.

To make matters far worse, Jo didn’t really like rules and regulations.
There was no overseeing body or committee who were supposed to control
the volatility, nor did anybody with an education or background in
economics serve as advisor to the prophet. Jo was in control of
everything and was trustee-in-trust of all church assets and monetary
affairs. Very early into the Nauvoo years, Jo made an utter and complete
mess of things, keeping terrible records or no records at all, not
recording his debts and assets with any reliable system, and having no
standardized value for acreage. This only compounded the problems of
exorbitant land prices for which he purchased the land to begin with.
Essentially, Jo was making a ton of business transactions, but often
wasn’t worrying about all that bothersome paperwork to make things
official, just a gentleman’s handshake agreement and maybe a signed bill
of sale with the one true prophet was enough to allay most people’s
concerns.

By mid-1840, the very beginning of the Irish Potato Famine, Jo knew how
much of a tangled web Nauvoo finances were and was trying to pass his
own monetary problems off to the High Council. They knew just as much as
he did that nothing was in order and all debts assumed by the Church
were essentially Jo’s own debts in his own name so they didn’t want to
get anywhere near the plutonium that was Jo’s finances. So they left Jo
in charge, and he continued to make a mess and accrued a debt of nearly
$200,000 in his name alone. His tangled web of finances remains
unresolved and largely mysterious even to historians today.
Understandably, after his death, the financial stress left on Emma to
untangle Smith assets from the Quorum of Apostles claimed church assets
became a central catalyst of conflict between Emma and Bloody Brigham.
Eps 72, 95

Just like in New York and Kirtland, Jo’s drive for money also ran hand
in bloody hand with his drive for power. The two are inextricable. Jo’s
drive for power in Nauvoo was absolutely ravenous. It starts with the
Nauvoo City Charter, which Jo collaborated to write with Robert B.
Thompson and John C. Wreck-it Bennett in 1840.

The charter was mostly a copy-paste job from the Springfield Illinois
charter, but with some modifications that gave the Mormons unique
privileges. For instance, the charter gives the city government
exclusive power to regulate ferries, which Jo would eventually use to
give himself a monopoly over the local ferry business because it was
quite lucrative. It also designated the mayor as head of the city
council, and the mayor and city councilors as justices of the peace,
thus combining executive, legislative, and judicial power in the person
of the city mayor, which of course would be Jo, giving him powers he
greatly abused, once Wreck-it Bennett was ousted.

But the most important section in the charter was Section 25,
authorizing the creation of a large city militia called the Nauvoo
Legion, making it answerable to the mayor and entitling it to the use of
state armaments. The treason charges against Jo in Missouri concerned
his raising and maintaining an unauthorized militia and using it to
fight the militia forces of the state. This provision assured that he
wouldn’t get in trouble for this again. Every good mafia boss dreams of
having a state-sanctioned army at their command but rarely get it. Jo
was exceptionally corrupt in many ways. Ep 66 we read through the entire
Nauvoo charter and discussed it extensively.

The Illinois state legislature ratified the Nauvoo charter without much
debate. Politicians knew the Mormons would be an important voting bloc,
and they also felt bad for the Saints after their experience in
Missouri. Both Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglass voted to approve
the charter and personally congratulated Wreck-it Bennett upon its
passage. Plus it was a pretty busy legislative session, so they probably
didn’t even read it to begin with. More than a dozen similar charters
were rubber-stamped through that same year. In any case, these
politicians could hardly have anticipated that the Nauvoo Legion would
prove to be a military force superior to any other western militia and
nearly a third the size of the US Army within 3.5 years, more than twice
the size of any state militia. They could hardly have guessed that in
addition to being prophet and trustee-in-trust of the Church, Jo would
also make himself mayor of Nauvoo, head of the city council, justice of
the peace, and lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion all at once. Jo
was building a theocracy, and the Nauvoo charter laid the foundation in
subtle modifications to dry, boring legal boilerplate that made no one
blink twice. Upon Nauvoo becoming a legally-recognized entity, Jo
successfully married the three pillars of social control, government,
military, and religious, into a single body. This was unprecedented in
American history, but common enough in world history that the American
constitution attempted to build in multiple barriers to stop this from
ever becoming possible. With the three pillars of social control, and
three pillars of government under his control, Jo became untouchable.

With city charter in hand, Jo started passing acts to set up the city
government. He divided the city into wards; this first use of the word
“ward” in Mormon history was a municipal rather than ecclesiastical
unit of organization. He also passed a religious freedom act that made
it a crime to disrupt a religious meeting, to participate in a mob, or
to disobey a civil officer in executing his duty. In some ways the act
was surprisingly progressive, because it protected Muslims as well as
Christians. But while it primarily seems designed to prevent any further
persecution of the sort the Saints had faced in Missouri, it also gave
Jo sweeping powers to violate freedom of speech which he frequently
abused.

For instance, three years later Jo ordered the city marshall to arrest
Augustine Spencer for alleged assault, and the marshall asked for help
from Chauncey Higbee, Robert D. Foster, and Charles Foster. Charles
Foster resisted and pointed a pistol at Jo’s chest before it was
removed. These three men considered the arrest to be unjust and refused
to help, so Jo ordered them arrested too, because they had violated the
religious freedom act by disobeying a city official executing his duty.
Ep 197.

Jo also incorporated a bunch of businesses. For instance, he set up the
Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association, with $100,000 of
capital stock to be sold to subscribers, and Jo to act as one of the
commissioners to sell the stock. He also set up the Nauvoo House
Association in much the same way. These businesses didn’t actually have
assets; they were just paper companies set up with an arbitrary value of
stock, much like the Kirtland Anti-Bank Company had been. When you don’t
have money, just print some\! It worked so well for Jo before, how could
it possibly go awry this time?\! Insanity is doing the same thing over
and over again and expecting different results. This was criminal
insanity.

We’ve been talking about how the city and city ordinances made the
offices of mayor and major-general really powerful and laid the
groundwork for him to occupy both offices, but I should add one caveat
here, which is that Jo didn’t make himself mayor right away. First he
gave that office to his left-hand man, John C. Wreck-it Bennett. Bennett
was more politically experienced and better-connected than Jo, and I
think Jo was basically apprenticing under Bennett. Besides, Jo already
had a lot on his plate running the Church and land deals, so he probably
found it easier to have a figurehead running the city than to run it
himself anyway. As long as Bennett remained loyal, having him as mayor
and lieutenant-general wasn’t functionally any different from Jo doing
those jobs himself. They lived together in the Homestead anyway so Jo
felt he could trust Bennett for over a year and a half.

With Bennett’s help, Jo spent a couple years consolidating his theocracy
in Nauvoo, which came in handy in June 1841 when Missouri officials made
an effort to rearrest Jailbreak Jo so he could finally be tried on those
treason charges from back in 1838. Unfortunately for Missouri, Jo had
planned for this. By June 1841, he not only controlled the Nauvoo city
government and the Hancock County government, but also had people in the
government of neighboring Adams County, including master of chancery
Charles A. Warren. So, when a posse from Missouri arrested Jo and tried
to carry him away through Adams County, Warren immediately put into
effect the contingency plan for this scenario: he issued a writ of
habeas corpus and ordered Jo brought before the Adams County court. The
posse complied with the order, and a hearing date was set for a few days
later. A writ of habeas corpus, by the way, is a Constitutional right
that allows an arrested person to challenge the legality of the arrest,
a power Jo REALLY liked and vigorously expanded in Nauvoo on repeated
occasions.

Meanwhile, a bunch of Jo’s most dangerous enforcers, including murderers
William Hickman and Hosea Stout, showed up to make sure the arresting
officers made no attempt to whisk Jo away before the hearing. They found
Jo in the charge of Adams County sheriff Thomas King and an officer from
Missouri. That night Sheriff King mysteriously fell ill, which wouldn’t
be the first time that one of Jo’s enemies got sick or died at a super
convenient time. We’ll talk about that in a few episodes as well.

Three days after all this went down, a hearing was held, with notorious
friend of the Mormons Stephen A. Douglas sitting as judge. Douglas knew
he needed to pander to the Mormons to get their votes in an upcoming
election, or else he would lose. The short version of this story is that
Jo’s lawyers argued that the Missouri grand jury indictment of Jo for
treason was obtained through fraud and bribery and motivated by
religious persecution, and that Missouri’s real goal with this
indictment was to stir a mob against Joseph Smith to get him vulnerable
to vigilante justice. Their argument was bolstered by the fact that an
angry mob gathered just outside the courthouse and erected a makeshift
gallows. The lawyer for the prosecution, meanwhile, seemed drunk, fell
sick in the middle of the proceedings, and fled from the courtroom
puking all the way. Once again, super convenient timing.

Ultimately, Judge Douglas ruled that due to a chain-of-custody issue
with the indictment, it was no longer valid and Jo had to be set free.
Jo marched out of the courtroom surrounded by 60 bodyguards and the
local sheriffs to protect him from the mob. To add an extra wrinkle to
this story, there was a rumor, reported by Sidney Rigdon, that Illinois
governor Thomas Carlin deliberately issued an illegal writ in order to
lure Jo to come to this courthouse, but that he had a legal writ ready
to be served on Jo after the trial. If there *was* another writ waiting,
Jo’s bodyguards never let the officers get close enough to serve it.
But, from all we can tell it was just a rumor. Ep 89.

This was the first, but certainly not the last, time that Jo would
exploit the right of habeas corpus to escape arrest in the Nauvoo era.
Having used it successfully once, he passed a bunch of laws to expand
habeas corpus rights in Nauvoo so that all a prisoner had to do was
write an explanation of why they shouldn’t be detained, and the writ of
Habeas Corpus would be granted. Arresting officers who refused to honor
the city’s habeas corpus writs could be arrested by city authorities and
jailed in Nauvoo. Eps 134, 136, 138, 165, 171.

Jo’s Nauvoo theocracy faced one of its first big challenges in May 1842
when John C. Bennett was excommunicated. We’ll get into some of the
reasons for that in a coming episode, but for now it’s enough to say
that Bennett’s departure left a huge power vacuum in the city. We called
it the Bennett Meltdown because the void and destruction left behind
after his violent departure and subsequent expose forever scarred the
Kingdom on the Mississippi. Jo took over as mayor, but I think he knew
he wasn’t really qualified to lead the Nauvoo Legion, which he wanted to
be a genuine military force. So he appointed James Arlington Bennet (who
by the way was not related to John C.) to replace John C. as
major-general and inspector general of the Legion. That ultimately
didn’t work out, because James Arlington wasn’t a Mormon, lived a
thousand miles from Nauvoo, and wasn’t willing to move to the city in
spite of this honorary appointment. But Jo and James Arlington exchanged
a bunch of bromance letters in which they fantasized about founding a
new empire together in the West.

Weirdly, Jo also appointed another unrelated non-Mormon Bennett who also
lived a thousand miles from Nauvoo, as James Arlington’s aide-de-camp.
This third Bennett, James Gordon Bennett, was a newspaperman who had
written negative articles about Mormonism in the past and who also had
no intention of moving to Nauvoo. But like James Arlington, he
fantasized about a Western empire and the role he might play in it. He
published an article in which he asked, “May not this wonderful Mormon
movement be the signal for a new religious revolution? Is not Joe Smith
its master-spirit, and General Bennett its military spirit? . . . *They
can already dictate to the State of Illinois,* and if they pursue the
same policy in other States, *will they not soon dictate to Congress,
and decide the Presidency?*” The tone of this Bennett’s article is
disputed as I tend to read it with a fair bit of snark and sarcasm,
however, the sentiment he conveyed was absolutely true. The Mormon
empire, and Jo’s penchant for criminal regimes, placed the Mormon
kingdom on a dangerous trajectory for “a new religious revolution”.

If all of this sounds crazy, that’s because it is. Was Jo obsessed with
guys named Bennett who had delusions of grandeur? Apparently John C.
Bennett recommended the other two Bennetts for the job and Jo followed
his recommendation, so maybe it was John C. Bennett who was obsessed
with other narcissistic Bennetts. They were all kindred scoundrels, Ep
115. For their part, as much as they genuinely liked the idea of a
western empire and the military spirit of Mormonism, the Bennetts were
mostly just having a bit of fun with Jo. They thought this whole thing
was a gas, although James Arlington took it more seriously than James
Gordon did. Within a few months, Jo got real and appointed a Nauvoo
Mormon named Wilson Law as the Legion’s major-general instead. Ep 132
talks all about these three Bennetts.

As long as we’re in 1842, the year Mary Rudge, the first competitive
female chess player who faced purely male competition and won, let’s
mention 1842’s gubernatorial election. The Mormons were a powerful swing
voting bloc, and they weren’t committed to either major national party,
so they courted both. They finally settled on the Democrats, throwing
their votes to Thomas Ford for governor of Illinois. They also elected
Crazy William Smith, the prophet Jo’s younger brother, as Nauvoo’s
representative to the Illinois legislature.

Thomas Ford was a smart guy. He knew that the Mormons had gotten him
elected, but he also knew that they were a problem, so he always
threaded a very delicate needle in his dealings with them. The court
records from the Missouri-Mormon war had been released at the beginning
of his campaign year and Ford undoubtedly read the record to understand
how the Mormon population could quickly spiral out of control during his
tenure. For instance, Jo sent the new Governor Ford a letter asking him
to acquit Jo of the outstanding warrant from Missouri signed by his
predecessor, Thomas Carlin. Ford replied that he believed the
outstanding warrant to be illegal, but that he didn’t think it wise to
nullify it by executive order; Jo needed to come to Springfield to have
the case heard before the Supreme Court of Illinois. Jo took him up on
this the following year; he traveled to Springfield with a lawyer and a
hundred bodyguards and successfully got the writ nullified. Ep 162.

By 1843, Jo had intelligence that Missouri officials were crafting an
airtight extradition order to come after him again. His response was to
establish a new Nauvoo city police force, with a mandate to “arrest all
persons who may be found in said city at unusual hours and under
suspicious circumstances, and bring such person or persons before the
captain of police, who may in his discretion detain such person or
persons until such time as the mayor or some alderman can examine into
the nature of the charges against him or them.” Now if any marshals,
constables, or sheriffs came to Nauvoo looking for Jo, the police could
detain them while he made his escape. Jo stacked the police with his
closest and most violent cronies, purely Danites through and through.

Around the same time, Nauvoo held its citywide elections. Joseph Smith
was elected and all his cronies were given their same positions in the
city government they’d held before, or their power was expanded by
appointing them to new boards and offices in addition to their old
positions. This was no election, it was a fledgling dictatorship
masquerading as a democracy. And, more importantly, it was what Jo
always wanted.

During the swearing in of the new city councilors, Jo “prophesied” to
the city recorder that it would be best for the council never to impose
any taxes or fees. If they would just cut all unnecessary expenses and
deregulate the city, then “Capitalists would come in from all quarters
and build mills, factories and machinery of all kinds; new buildings
would arise on every hand, and Nauvoo would become a great city.”

At this time Jo had over $100,000 in debt to his name, mostly because of
the land purchases we discussed earlier. He wanted to build up Nauvoo’s
economy really fast and finance everything with debt, while also cutting
taxes. He had tried to file for bankruptcy in 1842, but was
unsuccessful. It’s incredible, isn’t it? Jo started as a poor boy in
rags who thought socialism was great, but once he climbed the social
ladder through a steady and constant onslaught of lies and manipulation,
he’s a libertarian capitalist. So weird how we can see that transition
right in front of us. If only twitter were a thing during the Nauvoo
era, Jo would make a great presidential candidate.

So, no taxes, tons of debt, no factories in the city, no wealth coming
into the city, most of the converts were destitute before they made it
to Nauvoo regardless of whether they came from Missouri or Europe. How
was Jo running his empire? More lies, and more counterfeit.

Let’s start with the lies. Jo had this hotel called the Nauvoo House,
and he wanted it built with volunteer labor. So Jo took the Lord’s name
in vain and told everyone that it was a commandment from God to build
it, and that it was just as important as the temple. Here are his exact
words: “The building of the Nauvoo House is just as sacred in my view as
the Temple. I want the Nauvoo House built; it must be built, our
salvation depends upon it. . . . Brethren, hurry on to the Nauvoo House
thus, and you will built it. You will then be on Pisgah’s top, and the
great men will come from the four quarters of the earth, will pile the
gold and silver into it till you are weary of receiving them.” I feel
like that quote encapsulated Jo’s life more than any of his statements,
except maybe telling people he has more to boast of than Jesus. This is
a close second. I command you in the name of god to build me a hotel so
I can get rich. If he tried that manipulation tactic in 1826 he’d be
laughed out of town… he was laughed out of town. Well, not really
laughed so much as chased with torches and pitchforks, but you get what
I mean. But, since he’d built his reputation and was surrounded by
legions of sycophants, this was regarded as legitimately the words of
the almighty god.

What more do we need to understand Jo’s motivations than him telling
everybody to hurry up and finish the Nauvoo House so he could finally be
rich? That kind of says it all, doesn’t it?

Jo also told the Saints to bring all their gold and silver and their
building materials and donate them to the project. If they refused, they
were basically stealing from God. “If any are hungry, or naked,” he
said, “don’t take away the brick, timber, and materials that belong to
that \[Nauvoo\] house, but come and tell me, and I will divide with them
to the last morsel, and then if the man is not satisfied, I will kick
his backside.” That started generous, but once again ended with violent
resolution. If somebody is hungry, don’t use materials designated for
the Nauvoo house to feed yourself, I’ll take care of all your problems.
I’ll feed you. I’ll be your savior. And if you aren’t satisfied, prepare
to have your backside kicked. If they aren’t killed by your kindness,
kill them with your Danites. Ep 139.

Obviously in addition to taking donations for the Nauvoo House, Jo was
also taking donations for the temple. The temple building committee
sometimes took donations in money, but usually in goods. Then it would
issue people who worked on the temple some vouchers in exchange for
their work, which they could use to purchase goods from the temple
building committee store. This had the effect of raising capital,
getting labor done on the temple at nearly no cost, and created a new
form of money to exchange, the temple store vouchers. Once people
realized the Nauvoo House and Agriculture certificates were worthless,
this new system became the new form of money that’s not actually money.

Thus far this was pretty brilliant, but if we consider the implications
for just a second it’s incredibly manipulative. Any donations made to
the temple building committee were recorded in the Book of the Law of
the Lord, or the BoLoL as we’ve called it on the show. Jo portrayed the
BoLoL as an earthly equivalent of the Book of Life. If your name was
recorded in it then you were saved, and what is bound on earth is bound
in heaven. If your name wasn’t recorded in it, then you were not allowed
access to the temple. So this was basically a spiritual extortion
scheme. Ep 191.

This, and many other schemes predicated on pure lies were one aspect of
financing the Mormon empire of debt. What about the counterfeit, the
bogus? Well, around the same time that Jo created this temple committee
scheme to get people to volunteer work and possessions and telling the
city council not to raise taxes, he also seems to have developed a
pretty large counterfeiting operation. He’d probably dabbled in this
before, but in 1843 bogus money was everywhere in Nauvoo. Some of the
hottest collector items among Mormon artifact collectors today are
Nauvoo bogus coins. Bogus means counterfeit coins. Jo recruited a bunch
of different people into his bogus-making operation, including not only
Mormons like Theodore Turley and Peter Haws, but also non-Mormons like
Joseph H. Jackson, Edward Bonney, and Marinus G. Eaton, an old family
friend from Vermont. We don’t have a ton of details about this operation
because it was understandably very secretive, but there’s enough
evidence to say it existed. Eventually the whole Quorum of the Twelve
apostles, in addition to Joseph H. Jackson, would get indicted for
counterfeiting after Jo’s death. Use a counterfeit $20 bill in
Minneapolis and it's a death sentence, run an entire counterfeiting
operation and people call you the prophet of the restoration and sing
praise to you every Sunday. America’s pretty great. White collar crime
like this was simply Jo’s forte. It was how he lived. He breathed
criminality, he slept on a bed of lies.

Jo’s avarice for power couldn’t be reined in. Let’s hone in on politics
to run us out for today’s episode and mark complete the first in our
10-part series to finally bury Jo and his legacy once and for all. In
1843, the Whig candidate for Congress in Nauvoo’s Congressional district
was Cyrus Walker, said to be the best criminal lawyer in western
Illinois. By this time Jo had been involved in dozens of legal cases and
knew the power of having a good lawyer, so he promised Walker the Mormon
vote in exchange for Walker being his attorney after Jo was arrested in
Dixon, Illinois and rescued by his Danites. Eps 144-147. Walker agreed.
He made Mormon rights a prominent part of his political platform, and
stopped campaigning and worked the rest of the election season as Jo’s
lawyer. Jo swore multiple times from the pulpit that the Mormons would
vote for Walker.

But while Walker offered a carrot, the Democrats offered a carrot *and*
a stick. The Democratic candidate Joseph Hoge also made Mormon rights a
part of his platform; that was Hoge’s carrot. The stick was the threat
of dispatching the Illinois militia. In June 1843, Jo was arrested by
sheriffs from Missouri, but a Nauvoo court ordered his release under a
writ of habeas corpus. The sheriffs then went to the Democratic Illinois
governor and asked him to call out the militia to go raid Nauvoo and
take Jo into custody.

Two days before the election, a prominent Democrat promised a Mormon
agent that the Democrats wouldn’t call out the militia if the Mormons
voted Democrat. So the day before the election, Jo flipped and told his
followers that his brother Hyrum had had a revelation that they should
vote for the Democrats instead of Walker. Hoge trounced Walker in
Hancock County. The Whigs lost their minds, and the Whig newspapers
started a full-fledged campaign to expose Joseph Smith and bring him to
justice. Agitation by Whig newspapers probably contributed to Jo’s
assassination 9 months later and certainly became a pea in the bed of
Democrat Governor Ford’s and Jo’s friendship. So much for Hyrum’s
revelation. Ep 162.

In late December, Jo undertook an even bigger political project than
manipulating an election. He dispatched Orson Pratt to lobby Illinois
legislators to pass into law a document titled the Memorial to Congress.
The memorial claimed that because of the persecution they had constantly
faced, the Mormons and their city of Nauvoo should be treated not as a
city, but as a sovereign US Territory. It also proposed that the mayor
of Nauvoo be authorized to call upon the US Army to defend against mobs
and state militias, and that the Nauvoo Legion be paid wages by Illinois
state taxes rather than by taxes paid by the citizens of Nauvoo.
Considering that the non-Mormons of Illinois were already outraged about
how much power the Nauvoo charter gave Joseph Smith, this attempt to
expand that power to the federal level was a pretty brazen and frankly
pretty absurd power play. Eps 165, 197, 201.

And now, finally, we come to 1844 and Jo Smith’s run for the presidency
of the United States. 1844 is also the first year a telegraph was sent
by Samuel Morse. The 1844 election pitted Martin Van Buren for the
Democrats against Henry Clay for the Whigs. Both Van Buren and Clay had
rejected Mormon requests for redress after the Mormon War in Missouri--
Van Buren coldly and Clay snarkily. Jo refused to support either
candidate, and instead he announced himself as an independent candidate
for president of the United States. His platform, ghostwritten by W. W.
Phelps, included some noble sentiments like buying all the black people
out of slavery, but also some terrible sentiments like expansion into
Canada and Mexico and annexation of Oregon and Texas.

And this was no token campaign effort, either. Jo dispatched nearly 300
missionaries to every corner of the US to promote his campaign,
including such prominent church leaders as Sidney Rigdon and Parley P.
Pratt. Although Jo didn’t have a chance, the Mormons seem to have
believed he could win. On January 29, 1844, Jo recorded in his journal
that he drank a toast to the statement, “May Nauvoo become the empire
seat of government.” which provides a window into his truly
revolutionary mindset if one of his first plans was to relocate the
national capitol.

In connection with Jo’s presidential campaign, he also founded a secret
council called the Council of Fifty. Ep 168, 169, 170. The Council of
Fifty was constituted as a shadow government of the kingdom of God on
earth. Members were sworn to secrecy under penalty of losing their
heads. Not satisfied with shooting for president of the United States,
Jo had himself anointed king of the kingdom of God on April 11, 1844.
Interestingly, the Council of Fifty included three non-Mormons,
including two of Jo’s counterfeiting buddies and an inventor named Uriah
Brown, from whom Jo hoped to buy the designs for an experimental
flamethrower weapon which could be mounted on a submarine, which he
would sell to the Russian Emperor to form an alliance to overthrow the
powers that be.

Any analysis of Joseph Smith and early Mormonism leaves many questions
and unsolvable puzzles. There are, however, many trends and actions we
can use the basis of economic analysis to understand, follow the money.
With money comes power and the inverse is often true as well. Jo’s pure,
unadulterated, rapaciousness drove so many of his actions and decisions
which preceded his actions. Whether it was power, money, possessions,
women (which we didn’t even get into this episode), followers, land,
public adoration, or any other quantifiable commodity, more was never
enough for Joseph Smith. More, more, MORE\! He could never be satisfied.
He was proud of what he made and did, but jealous of what he could make
or do. He never acquired his wealth through honest, hard labor; every
moment of his life was marked by dishonesty and quick, easy money that
often wasn’t his. He convinced some wealthy parishioners to devote every
worldly possession to building up the kingdom of god and when that
wasn’t enough he sought consumption of every institution known to
humanity in the 1840s with a deeply-rooted desire for himself to be on
top of his own system of theocratic governance. The voice of his people
didn’t matter and when Jo was challenged he was likely to lash out and
act violently to get his way, whether that was kicking the backsides of
his followers or committing war crimes against militias of a state, it
didn’t matter. Jo’s voice was the voice of god and nothing would satisfy
his manifest destiny of materialism and transcendent authoritarianism.

I want to tell you so many more stories from early Mormon history, but I
realize that no matter how many pages of script I write, it’s simply
never enough.
