---
layout: post
title: >
    Road to Carthage 9 - Carthage Jail Gunfight
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-223-road-carthage-9-carthage-jail-gunfight/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/road-to-carthage-9-carthage-jail-gunfight
libsyn_embed: 15881714

category: RTC
date: 2020-09-03 20:00:00 PDT
---

Road to Carthage 9 - Carthage Jail Gunfight

On this episode, we discuss the assassinations of Hiram and Joseph Smith
in Carthage Jail.

Show links:  
Website
[<u>http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com</u>](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [<u>@NakedMormonism</u>](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook
[<u>https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311</u>](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311)  
Patreon
[<u>http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism</u>](http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism)  
Music by Jason Comeau
[<u>http://aloststateofmind.com/</u>](http://aloststateofmind.com/)  
Show Artwork
[<u>http://weirdmormonshit.com/</u>](http://weirdmormonshit.com/)  
Legal Counsel [<u>http://patorrez.com/</u>](http://patorrez.com/)

The evening of June 27th, 1844 in Carthage, Illinois was a fateful one.
This is a story many of us have heard a dozen times in church, it’s a
faith-promoting tale of martyrdom, sacrifice, and the beginning of the
last dispensation, sealed by the anointed blood of a messianic figure.
Joseph Smith, the founding prophet of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, died a martyr for what he believed. Long shall his
blood which was shed by assassins, stain Illinois while the earth lauds
his fame. Almost any Mormon can tell you the story of Carthage Jail
while simultaneously knowing almost nothing about it. Even historians
who extensively study Nauvoo history will often lay the blame of the
assassination on religious intolerance.

This is pure propaganda to push a religious agenda. What happened to
Joseph and Hyrum Smith that day was a symptom of ills we see around us
everyday. The lack of ability for the legal system to curtail flagrant
and unapologetic despotism, coupled with lynch mob rule executing
vigilante justice when they perceived no other remedy in the adolescent
legal system of American democracy. The trappings of mob rule and
vigilante justice are foundational aspects of majority-rule Americanism
and the victims are diverse and often subjugated peoples. Rarely is the
victim of a lynch mob one of the most powerful men in the country, but
the story of Joseph Smith’s death presents many irregularities for us to
contend with today.

This is also a story I’ve wanted to tell for years. Most episodes of
this podcast focus on one or two consequential sources to discuss
individual stories in Mormon history and their relevance to the greater
timeline; each of those stories has led to this point, where there are
dozens of sources to pull from. There are some discrepancies in some of
these sources but I’ve done my best to harmonize those where they can be
reconciled and I’ll discuss discrepancies where the sources can’t be
reconciled. Let’s begin.

The sun sank closer to the horizon west of Carthage; the shadows became
longer, the blue sky turned hues of yellow, red, and orange, tensions
remained high among the citizens of the city. Brigadier-General Deming,
called a jack-Mormon by the Carthage Grey militia, was personally
appointed by Governor Thomas Ford to oversee the guard duties of the
prisoners in Carthage Jail, Joseph, Hyrum, John Taylor, and Willard
Richards. General Deming gave a task to a young boy named William
Hamilton to sit on the roof of the city’s courthouse, the tallest
building, and use a looking glass to keep a lookout for anybody entering
the city, whether individual riders or entire groups of people. William
Hamilton grew up in Carthage, his dad ran the city tavern, Hamilton’s
Hotel, and young William could see for several miles in all directions
from this vantage point.

Around 4 p.m., he spotted what looked to be a large group of men coming
from the North. They were about 2 miles off and they were moving toward
Carthage on the road that leads from Nauvoo. William Hamilton was
ordered to immediately report anything like this to Brigadier-General
Deming, which he did. As soon as he told General Deming that a military
force was on the North edge of town coming from the road to Nauvoo, a
number of questions inevitably entered Deming’s mind. Were they Mormons
coming to break the prophet out of the jail? Were they vigilantes? Or,
were they dispatched by Governor Ford after his arrival to Nauvoo for
some other purpose? There was no way to know until Deming could
establish contact with the unidentified group of men.

We don’t know the details of what happened or what information was
exchanged, but General Deming, who’s sole task was to guard the prison,
fled. He left town and headed to the countryside miles from Carthage.
According to Governor Thomas Ford, Deming had “orders to guard the town,
observe the progress of events, and to retreat if menaced by a superior
force”. The number of Carthage Greys Deming had under his command was
about 60 men. This unidentified force coming into Carthage from the road
to Nauvoo outnumbered Deming’s men by 3-to-1. Deming had also seen that
the new jail guard, who’d taken over at the 4 p.m. changeover, were more
hostile to the prisoners than the previous guard. With these puzzle
pieces coming together, Deming now understood the reality of the
situation. He told young William Hamilton to go back up the courthouse
tower to continue observation and immediately report to him any
developments of the descending mob, which he did. Once that order was
issued, General Deming followed his orders from Governor Ford to retreat
in the face of the superior force. Whatever would transpire upon the
unknown force’s arrival was out of Deming’s hands and he had no way of
stopping it. The one guy Governor Ford counted on successfully guarding
the jail was running from Carthage like it was already on fire.

Franklin Worrel, a man in his early 20s, was head of the new set of
guards for the city jail. Levi Williams, the leader of the unidentified
mob, and Frank Worrel established communication. Levi Williams and his
buddy, Thomas Sharp, coordinated their ruse. Three shots fired in the
air would signal to Frank Worrel the beginning of the assault by the mob
from the outskirts of town. Thomas Sharp, good friend and neighbor of
Levi Williams as well as editor of the vociferously anti-Mormon paper
the Warsaw Signal, took a moment to rally the troops, or maybe he was
still in Warsaw at this moment, the record isn’t totally clear. A
disputed account details Thomas Sharp’s war cry to the men before they
marched into Carthage.

> “FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS\! The crisis has arrived when it becomes
> our duty to rise, as freemen, and assert our rights. The law is
> insufficient for us; the governor will not enforce it; we must take it
> into our hands; we know what wrongs we suffer, and we are the best
> calculated to redress them. Now is the time to put a period to the mad
> career of the Prophet; sustained as he is by a band of fanatical
> military saints\! We have borne his usurpations until it would be
> cowardice to bear them longer\! My Fellow citizens\! Improve the
> opportunity that offers; lest the opportunity pass, and the despotic
> Prophet will never again be in your power. All things are understood,
> we must hasten to Carthage and murder the Smiths, while the governor
> is absent at Nauvoo. Beard the lions in their den. The news will reach
> Nauvoo before the governor leaves. This will so enrage the “Mormons,”
> that they will fall upon and murder Tom Ford, and we shall then be rid
> of the d—-d little governor and the ‘Mormons’ too.” (Cheers.)

The clock ticked to 5 p.m. A disputed account claims Frank Worrel, the
jail guard, sent a message to Colonel Levi Williams:

> “Now is a delightful time to murder the Smiths. The governor has gone
> to Nauvoo with all the troops. The Carthage Greys are left to guard
> the prisoners. Five of our men will be stationed at the jail; the rest
> will be upon the public square. To keep up appearances, you will
> attack the men at the jail—a sham scuffle will ensue—their guns will
> be loaded with blank cartridges—they will fire in the air.”

William Hamilton watched atop the city courthouse through his looking
glass and saw “a body of armed men- about 125- came out of the woods on
foot and started in a single file, behind an old rail fence, in the
direction of the jail. They were then about three-fourths of a mile
distant.” Following order, Hamilton tried to report this development to
Brigadier-General Deming, but… Deming was nowhere to be found. Young
William Hamilton wouldn’t make it back to the jailhouse until after the
shooting had already started.

As this still unidentified mob descended on the jail, the Carthage Greys
were stationed about a quarter mile west of the jailhouse. Frank Worrel
and his boys were the Greys guarding the jail, but they were only 5-8 in
number. The remainder of the Greys wouldn’t join the fray until they saw
Levi Williams’s 125 men assaulting the jail. Almost everything we’re
discussing today was already finished before any of the Carthage Greys
even had time to get to the jail.

These 125 men under the command of Levi Williams were mostly citizens of
Warsaw, the twin anti-Mormon city to Carthage 18 miles to its west. The
men would be easily recognized in Carthage by any witnesses and
therefore took measures to conceal their identity before emerging from
the woods north of town. About 1/3rd of them blackened their faces with
soot or painted their faces with red mud; if the assailants were lucky
the assault would be blamed on freed slaves or displaced Native
Americans.

Three shots were fired in the air, signalling the beginning of the plan.
Levi’s men marched toward the jail. “Col. Williams shouted out, “Rush
in\!—there’s no danger boys—all is right\!””

> The jail where the Smiths were confined is situated at the extreme
> northwestern edge of the dismal village, at the end of a long,
> ill-kept street whose middle is a dusty road and whose sides are gay
> with stramonium and dog-fennel. As the avengers came in sight of the
> mean-looking building that held their prey, the sleeping tiger that
> lurks in every human heart sprang up in theirs, and they quickened
> their pace to a run. There was no need of orders, — no possibility of
> checking them now.

Frank Worrel and his 7 compatriots guarding the jail feigned a defense
according to plan with Levi Williams. The jailor, George Stigall, was up
in the apartment with the prisoners and when he heard “a little rustling
at the door” he ran down the stairs to the entrance to see what the
commotion was about. Levi’s men were already descending on the jail and
they cried out for the guards to surrender. Frank Worrel and his boys
fired their guns at the attackers. But the guns were loaded with blank
cartridges and would do no more than leave a powder-burn mark on
clothing. Frank Worrel, who was 19 at this time, supposedly continued to
struggle against the attackers, presumably to make it more believable
that he was trying to actually defend the jail. He also had a stutter
and an eyewitness account could be interpreted to conclude that Worrel
actually wasn’t a conspirator in the act, but other evidence seems to
betray that conclusion. “He floundered and pounded, vociferating
"Y-y-y-y-you\! - "Lie still you fool we are not going to hurt you\!"
D-d-d - continued Frank kicking and struggling to break loose and trying
franticly to break the third commandment though his impediment of speech
saved him from the actual sin”

The Jailor, George Stigall, quickly understood what was going on. The
mob outside his jail was too large and he knew he could do nothing for
the prisoners. He either cowered in a corner or fled out the other exit
of the jail; he simply can’t be placed for the next 5 minutes of
history. Franklin Worrel did his job as agreed with Levi Williams and he
was pushed to the side of the doorway. It was claimed later that he held
the door open for the mob to flow into the jail unhindered, but I’m
pretty sure a mob of guys can hold their own door without Frank Worrel’s
help.

With so much commotion outside, Willard Richards “glanced an eye by the
curtain--saw a 100 ar\[m\]ed men arou\[n\]d the door.” Richards told the
other prisoners what he saw and the reality sank in for Richards, John
Taylor, and Hyrum and Joseph Smith. We can’t possibly imagine what went
through their minds, maybe I’m about to die. This is the end of the
line. I won’t ever see my family or my wives ever again. None of us know
what we’ll think about when our lives flash before our eyes but this was
that moment for these 4 men.

The jail itself is an interesting building and we need a brief
description to visualize the events of the next 3 minutes. The building
standing today is the same building as was built in 1839 and housed the
prisoners; it isn’t a recreation. It was purchased by the Mormon church
in 1903 and was restored in the late 1990s to become a tourist location
staffed by missionaries who tell the Carthage story to tens of visitors
every year. I’ve been twice and can see the building in my mind’s eye
better than my own childhood home. It’s an experience you don’t forget.
The building itself is relatively small. You walk in through the kitchen
area on the north side of the building, after which you enter the main
living area. This is where the jailor, George Stigall, lived. Then you
turn to the right and you see the landing area with a staircase. To the
right of this landing area is a jail cell with an iron bar door and
barred windows. Walk down the short corridor and you come to another
building entrance and the stairway. The stairway is very narrow, barely
wide enough to fit two people if they scrunch their shoulders together.
At the top of the stairs is a small doorway which leads into the upper
story jail cells. This has a wooden door with an iron bar door behind
it. When you walk into that room, there are individual holding cells
with more iron bars and metal locks and the wooden and iron bar door
also have locks. The windows are very narrow to the point that maybe a
letter could be passed through the slit but no person or even a cat
could fit through the jail windows. The missionaries call this the
dungeon. These are the secure holding cells the prisoners planned on
going into once they had finished supper that evening, but never got the
opportunity. Had they been in here, the mob wouldn’t have been able to
get line of sight to shoot the prisoners unless they somehow broke
through the two doors or the jailor gave them the key to get in, which
it doesn’t seem like George Stigall would have done. Once you’re at the
top of the stairs, you turn right and the hallway extends to a window on
the other side of the stairway rail, but immediately in front of you is
a wooden door with a broken latch which opens into the room ahead. When
you walk through that door, you enter a room that is about 15 x 15 feet
with white plaster walls, a small hearth and fireplace, a window on the
far wall and two windows on the south wall. There’s also a bed against
the southwest wall that was actually on the southeast wall at the time.
Today there are benches for people to sit during the missionary tour of
the jail, but of course back then there was probably a desk and chair in
the otherwise open space of the room.

That’s the general layout of the jail itself and it remains in that
basic form today for tourists to learn the Carthage jail story from
Mormon missionaries. However, and this is important, they leave out a
few details and only talk about those details if you ask the question
directly. Questions like, did Joseph Smith have wine and tobacco, or a
pistol that day? They know the facts, but they only divulge if you ask
directly. Lying by omission for the lord, I suppose.

Levi Williams’s men pushed through Frank Worrel’s guard, into the ground
floor of the jail, shoving the jailor, George Stigall out of the
picture, and ran up the stairs. It seems the men weren’t exactly sure
where the prisoners were and as they ascended the stairs they fired “A
shower of musket balls… thrown up the stairway against the door of the
prison in the second story”. The number of shots at this door is unknown
but was probably less than a dozen before the men realized the prisoners
weren’t in the jail cells of that room and were instead in the debtors
apartment to their right. Levi’s men continued to clamor up the steps
and fill the hallway above the staircase facing the door to the room
holding the prisoners, trying to push their way through the door.

The time dilation becomes a reality we must deal with here. All of the
events described from Frank Worrel’s feigned defense of the jail to the
men rushing up the stairs would have transpired in less than 30 seconds.
In fact, everything we’ll spend most of the episode on today took place
in the space of about 6 minutes. It was a chaotic time with hundreds of
individual actors and only one resolution to the sequence of events.
We’ll spend 12 times the amount of time talking about the events as it
took for them to transpire. As these men were rushing up the steps and
firing into the jail cell door at the top of the steps, the prisoners,
Jo, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith, John Taylor, and White-out Willard
Richards, all understood that this was their final stand. They quickly
braced themselves against the door. That wooden plank was literally the
only thing between them and the mob of 60-70 men who’d rushed into the
jail to shoot the prisoners like the rats in a cage they were. That door
was the final bulwark protecting their lives and they knew it, but the
attacking men also knew it. This is an unstoppable force meeting an
immovable object.

The attackers tried to push on the door, but Richards, and Taylor
immediately braced themselves against the door. Jo and Hyrum both
grabbed their pistols, Hyrum with his single-shooter and Jo with his
six-shooter pepperbox pistol, and braced against the door helping Taylor
and Richards. Hyrum was closest to the latch while Richards was closest
to the hinges of the door by the northwest corner of the room.

As the mob filled the upper story and the stairwell, the prisoners
continued to push hard against the mob’s advances. The mob, however,
thought the locking mechanism on the door was holding it shut, not the 4
men on the other side. A shot blew through the metal latch of the door,
shattering the workings of an already broken door latch. When a hot lead
ball shot from a pistol collides with the cold steel of a door latch,
the bullet does anything but act predictably. It broke through the
latching mechanism, but it didn’t emerge on the other side of the door
with any lethal effect. What it did was scare the prisoners because they
now understood that the attackers were willing to use gunshots to get
through the door against which they were braced.

By the time the prisoners realized this, it was too late. Hyrum pulled
his single-shot pistol out of his pocket and attempted to shoot it
through the door at the assailants. Whether or not this shot hit true or
simply embedded into the door is unknown. After firing, Hyrum dropped
the pistol and braced himself against the door. It didn’t much matter,
because as soon as he pushed his weight against the door, a second ball
blasted through the door a few inches above the door latch. This proved
to be an infamous and effective shot. With 4 men bracing one door,
bullets smashing through that door were bound to hit somebody. Now, when
you picture somebody bracing themselves against a door to keep people
out or in, you can see how they’re postured against it. One shoulder is
lower with full shoulder and arm contact on the door, one foot hard
against the floor and door jamb, one leg extended far behind them to
provide a triangle figure with the floor for the best structural
support, and the other hand above their head pushing against the door as
well for added support. This is the posture Hyrum Smith was in while
yelling to his younger brother to hold the door, shoot at the men
through it, or do something to help. The second shot that pierced
through the door above the latch struck true. Hyrum’s head was pressed
against the door or very close to it, looking downward slightly at the
floor while using every bit of his strength. This ball hit him in the
face on the left of his nose, traveling through his skull and exiting
below his jawbone, possibly entering his neck again before passing out
the other side. This bullet could have severed his brain stem, which
would have caused him to go instantly limp.

I want to use this as a jumpoff point to talk about this whole Carthage
jail incident in the abstract for a few minutes. This isn’t to be overly
morbid, this digression is merely to discuss the deep and sinister
reality of what happened that fateful day. Besides, nothing I’m about to
describe is any more disturbing than what you see on primetime tv.
Still, listeners beware and abandon hope all ye who enter here.

As humans, we have a lot of traditions. Rituals, holy days, languages,
family dynamics, ways to look at the complexities of the world. All of
these traditions evolve from older traditions and sometimes we get
better at them in some way as those practices evolve. However, one of
the oldest human traditions, older than language, religion, using fire
to cook our food, older than any system of thought, is killing one
another. Us humans, we’re spectacularly good at killing each other.

We’re so good at killing each other that we got bored with rocks and
sticks so we attached rocks to sticks and broke the rocks to make them
sharper and thereby more effective at the job of killing. When that
wasn’t enough we put rocks on sticks and learned how to shoot them at
each other from a distance. Then we found out that some rocks are better
than other rocks. Then we wanted to make rocks shaped in a certain way
so the entire stick can be a rock so we heated up the rocks and turned
them into metal sticks with sharp edges. During all of this we also
figured out some plants can kill each other, burning each other, pouring
burning oils on each other, and plenty of morbid and lethal ways to deal
with each other. Beyond that, however, we also figured out all sorts of
unique and novel ways to hurt each other without actually killing each
other, which is a fascinating phenomena in and of itself. I doubt any
other species of animal engages in torture the way us humans do to
specifically cause harm without quite killing the victim; a remarkable
practice that distinguishes us below any other animals in the kingdom.

Millions of years have passed and we’ve never stopped innovating on
murdering each other. Now, in the last 1000 years, the technology of
death has seen a figurative and literal explosion in the form of
chemical reactions. Fire is super deadly, but what if we could throw it
100 meters through the air at our enemies? What if we put fire in a
little metal ball that exploded and sent the metal and fire flying in
all directions? Gunpowder alone has done more to advance the technology
of murder than arguably any other human invention. A little potassium
nitrate, some charcoal, and sulfur, all sorts of fun inventions can
center around this simple chemical reaction which is stable until heat
is added. Over a thousand years ago, a Chinese inventor used gunpowder
to shoot spears from a bamboo tube. When bamboo became too fragile for
larger explosions, metal tubes were forged and the gun was invented a
few hundred years later. It wasn’t long before this incredible invention
spread across the planet and became a mainstay of well-funded militias
who could absolutely dominate other forces who didn’t have the
innovation known as the gun. The tactical advantage afforded by a gun is
incredible, why get up close and personal with swords, that guy might
kill me, instead I’ll shoot him from a distance where he can’t possibly
kill me with his sword or spear then I’ll reload and kill all his
friends while never in real danger myself. If there are enough of those
guys, you can take them all out with one gun if it’s big enough. A big
enough explosion and you can eventually turn entire civilizations into
glass surrounded by inhabitable radioactive waste. Modern problems
require modern solutions. Look how far we’ve come.

As all of this murder innovation was rapidly expanding, technologies for
exploring and colonizing unknown lands was also aggressively
accelerating. Trans-oceanic trade and circumnavigation transitioned from
a rarity by explorers to an everyday occurrence by traders and settlers.
These people traversed oceans in the matter of weeks or months carrying
guns and cannons; they became the superior force to which the rest of
the world was forced to bow. Some gun-toting miscreants here in North
America told the vastly superior British empire to get off their lawn
and won a war to declare their will the final word that would carry this
landmass into the next few centuries. Those same people kicked off a
multi-generational campaign of colonization so brutal it resulted in the
near complete eradication of most of the people already living here.
Thousands of cultures and languages, millions died by guns, germs, and
steel when their own innovations of murder simply couldn’t keep pace.
There is simply no denying the power of the gun in all of this.

The oldest human tradition of killing one another is never more simple
and effective than the gun. A human with unnecessary holes in them
doesn’t live for very long. The entire science of ballistics
transitioned from calculating the distance and accuracy of trebuchets
and catapults to figuring out how a gun can best be designed to make a
bullet go exactly where the shooter wants. Rifled barrels, cartridge
rounds, repeating actions, machine guns, larger calibers and heavier
powder loads, vehicles to carry these guns, artillery that fires rounds
over miles instead of yards, bombs dropped from the air or fired from
underwater; each of these innovations increased the murdering power of
the humans wielding their portable death machines. Today you can buy a
portable death machine for less than an average grocery store run and
there’s something like 3 of for every citizen of this country; it’s a
baffling world to me.

When a bullet makes contact with human flesh, some truly incredible
things happen. This is the science of terminal ballistics. This isn’t
gratuitous, this is foundational information to bring into focus the
reality of what we’re discussing today. When a bullet hits flesh, it
does some really crazy stuff. That bullet is carrying a ton of kinetic
energy. With relatively little mass accelerated with so much energy,
these hot pieces of lead travel extremely quickly, with many modern
bullets breaking the speed of sound, that’s over 750 mph or 343 meters
per second. If designed correctly, all that kinetic energy transfers to
human flesh upon impact. The primary cavity is where the bullet enters
the flesh and it’s usually the size of the bullet caliber, but that’s
only where the carnage begins.

The majority of the bullet’s energy is transferred as soon as it
punctures through the flesh. The temporary cavity created immediately
after entering the skin can expand the tissue up to 40 times the size of
the bullet. Most bullets are less than a half-inch in diameter, but the
cavity it makes can become twice the size of a baseball. Tissue is
mostly liquid and doesn’t compress, meaning all of it expands into the
surrounding flesh. It does that by compressing organs, ripping and
tearing tissue, and causing incredible amounts of chaos and damage as
the bullet transfers its energy by creating that temporary cavity. As
the flesh absorbs all that energy it creates what’s known as an impact
crater, where the flesh is destroyed behind the initial impact cavity.
Once that energy is absorbed, the flesh will attempt to return to its
form prior to the bullet entering it. The rebounding of the flesh to try
and seal up this temporary cavity can be nearly as destructive as the
bullet itself creating the cavity.

Different bullets act differently and in the case of today’s subject
matter they’re all spherical lead balls that can do all sorts of crazy
things. Full metal jacket bullets, as used by militaries across the
globe, are designed to pass through bodies and leave very little tissue
damage but incapacitate the victim. Hollow-points that cops use are
designed to stop inside the victim; this is the stopping power of the
bullet. When a hollow point bullet hits the target, it immediately
expands into a mushroom-like form, transferring all its energy
immediately and stopping somewhere inside the body; which also ensures
the safety of anybody who may be behind the victim.

Now, if you’re the victim of a gunshot, the best possible outcome is for
the bullet to pass straight through because some of its energy isn’t
transferred to the flesh. Much worse scenarios, however, result when the
bullet is able to transfer all the energy and it can do that in a few
ways. If the chunk of flesh is thick enough, like center mass on the
target, a person’s torso, the person’s organs will absorb all the energy
and the bullet will remain inside their body. But, much worse things can
also happen and that’s when bones get involved. Bones can handle a lot
of stress and torque, but high-velocity low-mass impact is not what
bones evolved to withstand. When the bullet strikes a bone, the transfer
of energy to the bone will often cause it to disintegrate, shooting bone
fragments into the surrounding tissue causing even more damage.
Basically, a bullet striking a bone can turn that bone into a grenade
inside the victim’s body. This will also cause the bullet to ricochet to
other areas of the body. When fired into a skull, a bullet can enter the
brain, ricochet off the back of the skull, and travel the opposite
direction back through the brain, causing even more damage as it
continues to expend all its energy. Bullets can also tumble after
entering, which causes irregular and multi-directional permanent
cavities. The permanent cavity is what’s left behind from the path of
the bullet itself. Once that initial cavity is opened up immediately
after impact and the tissue closes around the expanded flesh in the
temporary cavity, there’s still the path of the actual bullet which
forms a channel of ripped and destroyed tissue. If you’ve ever seen
videos of ballistics gel or some episodes of mythbusters, you know how
everything I just described looks; it’s some horrifying stuff to think
that’s a pretty accurate representation of human flesh being shot.
That’s what’s known as the permanent cavity.

That’s the nitty gritty of how bullets interact with flesh, but when a
human is shot, rarely is it immediately fatal. We’ve all seen action
movies where the hero wastes entire armies of baddies with a single
bullet to each enemy as they blast through the baddie lair and then
they’re captured by the ultimate baddie who gives a long speech before
the hero is rescued by the sidekick. Hi-ya\! Unexpected variable\!
That’s fun, but it’s not how humans actually act when they’re shot. A
bullet to the head or through the heart are about the only way to cause
a person to go immediately limp or unconscious, even then they will
often survive for a few minutes even if immobilized. For an absolutely
instantaneous death, you have to sever the brain stem. Prisoners of
death camps and political dissidents in gulags will often catch a bullet
to the back of the head and that’s because when the bullet is fired
right at the base of their skull, the brain stem is destroyed and
there’s basically no suffering, no noise, no protestation, nothing;
just lights out and that’s the end of it. Anything other than a brain
stem severance, the person will live for a certain amount of time before
bleeding out or organ failure. Center mass shots, hits to the torso,
will often leave a person alive for minutes or hours before death, or if
the bleeding is stopped they can recover slowly, often dying to
complications of the shot sometime later.

I also want to note that hitting nerve centers or tendons can cause
immediate loss of control. A person shot in the leg or arm will have
instant nerve damage and they’re often unable to use the muscles damaged
by the shot, sometimes never again. A shot or seven to the back is
exceptionally dangerous as the fragmentation of hitting bone coupled
with the nervous system running through the spine will inevitably cause
loss of control, loss of feeling, and usually paralysis to some extent
if the person survives. I’ve only seen a few movies which accurately
depict gunshot wounds and the one that comes to mind is Public Enemies,
the Johnny Depp and Christian Bale movie about the Great Depression bank
robbers. It stuns me how accurate that movie portrays people being shot.
It’s also an oddly apt movie to bring into today’s episode.

This second shot through the apartment door that hit Hyrum in the face
did the fatal damage necessary to render him useless to the other 3 men
in the room. Legend says that Hyrum yelled “I am a dead man” as he fell
backward, but if his brain stem was actually severed, which the evidence
indicates this likely happened, he wouldn’t have spoken a word, he would
have just gone limp while the muscles in his body pushed him away from
the door and he fell backwards, hitting his head on the hardwood floor
as the body slumped lifelessly. If the brain stem wasn’t severed, the
wound to his neck would cause him to bleed out within a matter of
minutes while he remained largely conscious of what happened around him,
unable to speak or cry out for help as his lungs and esophagus filled
with his own blood and his life drained out. He would have watched
everything we’re about to discuss, powerless to change the situation. I
tend to believe his brain stem was severed and he had two large holes in
his neck for reasons we’ll discuss in a bit.

When Hyrum collapsed on the floor, the other prisoners, fueled purely by
adrenaline, understood they were next. Before he was chased out of
Carthage earlier that day, Stephen Markham had left his cane, called a
rascal beater because of the textured knob at the top, in the jail.
Markham had expected to return to the jail and didn’t mean to leave it
there, but the Carthage Greys had other plans for him. However, this did
provide John Taylor and Willard Richards with a second cane to use as a
weapon. As the mob clamored up the stairs, Taylor and Richards armed
themselves with Markham’s rascal beater and another cane that was in the
room. These canes would prove invaluable in preserving their lives.

Seeing his brother fall and blood beginning to pool underneath Hyrum, Jo
pulled his 6-shooter Allen and Thurber pepperbox pistol from his pocket.
Without Hyrum helping to keep the door pushed closed, Richards and
Taylor began to struggle under the force of the mob trying to push the
door open. It nudged opened slightly, just a few inches, and the
attackers tried to push the barrels of their state-issued rifles through
the door into the room. Taylor and Richards at this point used their
canes to hit the barrels of the guns sticking through the door. Jo saw
an opportunity and shoved the muzzle of his pepperbox pistol through the
small opening, squeezing the trigger as fast as his finger could pull.
This situation is the exact intent for the design of a pepperbox pistol.
They’re useless at hitting a target even on the other side of a room,
but when fired point-blank range into a crowd of people, every ball will
strike flesh. However, pepperbox pistols are also notoriously unreliable
even if you are able to keep the powder dry. Of the six charged barrels,
only three actually fired, some traditions say 4 of the 6 fired; we can
be certain of at least 3. John Hay, an eyewitness counts 4 and even
details how each bullet struck true on each victim.

> He shot an Irishman named Wills, who was in the affair from his
> congenital love of a brawl, in the arm; Gallagher, a Southerner from
> the Mississippi Bottom, in the face; Voorhees, a half-grown
> hobbledehoy from Bear Creek, in the shoulder; and another gentleman,
> whose name I will not mention, as he is prepared to prove an alibi,
> and besides stands six feet two in his moccasins.

None of these shots were fatal, even Gallagher who was shot in the face.
To be clear, Jo was trying to hold the door from being pushed further
open and just stuck his left arm around the side of the door into the
opening when he fired. He didn’t take the time to aim at anybody
specifically, he was just shooting a smoothbore pepperbox pistol into a
mass of dozens of men; he was bound to hit every shot. Richards and
Taylor later claimed that 2 of these men died from being shot by Jo, but
there’s no evidence to substantiate the claim and those two men simply
wouldn’t have any way of knowing that information.

Once these 3 or 4 shots were fired by Jo from his smuggled pistol, the
men at the door briefly recoiled. They would have been struck with
second thoughts because the prisoners weren’t supposed to be armed. They
were shot at by one of the prisoners, but what if all of them had
pistols? They also wouldn’t have known that the bullet through the door
had just killed Hyrum so they probably considered these shots from Jo to
be aggression, not retaliation. What started as an attempt to
assassinate two men now had become a gunfight and the attackers didn’t
know if another mistake might lead to more of them getting shot. They
needed to make quick work of this matter.

Outside the jail, the Carthage Greys were responding to the commotion
from their encampment about a quarter mile away. The report of gunfire
coming from the jail could mean only a few things, either the Mormons
were trying to break the prophet out of jail, or another militia was
there to kill the prophet. Either way, they were needed and the roughly
60 Carthage Greys who remained by special appointment from Governor
Ford, under the command of Robert F. Smith, began to run with their
rifles toward the jail. It’s possible some of them were aware of the
plan by Levi Williams to storm the jail, but it’s most likely that
almost all those men didn’t know what kind of situation they would
encounter once reaching the jail. A quarter mile can be covered by an
armed soldier in the space of about 2.5-3 minutes at full
adrenaline-fueled sprint.

Back in the jail, the attackers redoubled their onslaught after taking
shots from the prophet. They pushed even harder on the door. With Hyrum
dead and unable to help hold the door, John Taylor and Joseph Smith
realized they were outnumbered, outgunned, and didn’t have any way to
prevent the continued attack. They tried as best they could to hold it
while Willard Richards and John Taylor continued to try and hold the
door closed with one arm while hitting the gun barrels sticking through
the door with Stephen Markham’s rascal beater cane.

Inevitably, the mob gained the upper hand and pushed even harder on the
door. This door opens into the apartment and when fully opened creates a
space in the corner of the room which covers anything in that space.
Another shot rang through the door and grazed Willard Richards on the
ear. As all these gunshots were going off, Levi’s men in the courtyard
surrounding the jail heard all the gunshots inside the jail and began
firing their rifles into the window from outside. None of these men
could get a line of sight to fire on anybody in the room so their
bullets smashed through the window and embedded into the ceiling above
the window. These are all single-shot rifles and undoubtedly some of the
soldiers carried their own pistols as secondary weapons, but the
Quartermaster of state militias usually didn’t issue pistols of any sort
to soldiers like this. They were armed with the state issue rifles and
swords, any other guns they privately owned were brought of their own
volition for this special task. Each of these rifles required reloading
before they could be fired again. A skilled soldier could get off three
rounds per minute, which means about 15-20 seconds to reload a rifle
with powder, ball, and wad. Cartridge rifles and repeating actions
wouldn’t be widely used until a few decades later in the Civil War as
those inventions were just a little too young to be widely circulated by
the mid-1840s.

What all that means is the assailants probably fired in volleys. A salvo
of rifle shots would go off, then there’d be a short delay before the
soldiers were ready to fire again. Those at the front of the mob could,
however, increase their rate of fire if they were handed loaded guns
from other assailants further back in the crowd. To what extent
reloading verses passing already loaded guns took place in this instance
can never be known. We do know, however, that the men in the hallway
began pushing into the jail cell while the men in the courtyard fired
rounds into the window, partially in hopes that a bullet might get lucky
and strike one of the victims, but more so to dissuade any attempt to
jump out the window to escape.

Jo yelled to the other 2 surviving men, “That’s right, Brother Taylor,
parry them off as well as you can.” while Richards and Taylor continued
to use their canes to deflect the rifle barrels that were sneaking into
the room. Taylor remembered “It certainly was far from pleasant to be so
near the muzzles of those firearms as they belched forth their liquid
flames and deadly balls.” As more rifle muzzles were pushed through the
small opening of the door, more men continued to push up the narrow
stairway and against the door. 3 men holding the door can only withstand
so much of this pressure before the mob outside the door gains the
advantage. Hyrum’s corpse bleeding out was certainly a morale crusher as
well; a harbinger of their coming deaths.

Jo and Taylor realized the futility and peeled away from the door,
simultaneously, and made a run for the window, leaving Richards to be
pinned behind the door in the corner of the room as the mob pushed their
way in. At this point, the two running men became completely exposed to
gunfire while Hyrum bled out at the feet of the assailants. While
running, John Taylor was the first to be struck.

While he ran, this first bullet hit John Taylor’s leg. The bullet
entered into the back of his upper thigh, glanced off his bone
flattening the ball, and continued it’s deflected path, lodging in the
front of his leg a half inch underneath the skin. While Taylor was lucky
with this shot as it didn’t directly hit his leg bone and cause the bone
to disintegrate, the ball lodged barely underneath the skin at the front
of his thigh, meaning it was able to transfer all its kinetic energy
into his flesh; it immediately severed nerves and Taylor fell forward on
his way to the window. He “lost entirely and instantaneously all power
of action or locomotion” and hit the window sill in a falling kneeling
type of position. His torso collided with the window sill, breaking his
pocket watch with the hands at precisely 5:16:21 p.m., freezing in time
the infamous moment when this gunfight occurred. He yelled out “I am
shot\!”. As Taylor stumbled into the window sill, he briefly thought “we
might have some friends outside, and that there might be some chance of
escape,” but what he saw out the window was about 100 men with their
guns pointed at the window, which now framed his face looking down at
the assailants.

In a situation like this, people don’t have time to think, they just
act. When Taylor saw a hundred guys out the window with rifles pointed
at him, he pushed himself back from the window sill and they fired
another volley of bullets into the ceiling above his head. Taylor later
attributed this physical movement to divine intervention. It’s not like
he had time to run the calculations in his mind that there were probably
less men in the room than out in the courtyard, thus increasing his
chances of survival if he stayed instead of dove out the second-story
window; he just acted based on the greatest threat in front of his face.
He pushed himself back from the window, unknowingly securing his
survival, and laid on the ground, then realized that the men were
pushing into the room from the doorway. He was unable to stand, but he
could roll, which he did to the only place where there was any cover,
under the bed in the southeast corner of the room by the window. As he
tried to roll he was entirely exposed and the men pushing into the room
continued to shoot John Taylor. He was prone with his feet toward the
men pushing into the room, which explains the nature of the rest of his
wounds. The second shot hit him in the left knee, which traveled up his
thigh and embedded near his groin. He claimed in 1854 that this bullet
was never extracted. He was covering his head with his arms like a boxer
as he tried to roll and the third bullet entered his left arm near the
elbow. This bullet ripped through muscle and tendon all the way up his
arm, crushed through his wrist joint, and came to a halt “a little above
the upper joint of my little finger.” Had his arms not been up
protecting his head, this third bullet likely would have struck his
torso or head; I think most people would take a bullet ripping through
their arm instead of their organs or skull any day of the week.

The fourth and final bullet was the most gruesome. His left flank took
all these shots so he must have been nearly under the bed as all three
of these bullets hit him simultaneously. The fourth ball entered the
flesh of his left hip. While this was the nastiest wound of them all, it
was also the least damaging. This ball essentially grazed his hip, but
the ball passed straight through, meaning it didn’t transfer all its
energy into his body. The temporary cavity a bullet creates can expand
the flesh up to 40 times the diameter of the bullet. When this bullet
entered his hip, that expansion basically caused his hip flesh to
explode where that temporary cavity was made, exposing bone and flesh,
causing massive amounts of bleeding. According to Taylor, the bullet
“tore away the flesh as large as my hand, dashing the mangled
fragments of flesh and blood against the wall.” This massive chunk of
flesh missing meant the ball didn’t lodge in his body; it carried the
rest of its energy with the pieces of flesh and hip bone onto the wall
above his head as he finished rolling under the bed.

As John Taylor absorbed these shots, the men pushing into the room
probably thought they’d successfully killed Taylor after seeing the
blood and bone splatter on the wall, but he wasn’t their primary target.
Their target was running to the same window Taylor had fallen against
before rolling under the bed. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were the men the
militia were there to kill that day. Hyrum was motionless on the floor,
and Jo was dashing for the window.

The mob took aim at the fleeing Joseph and fired. He immediately took a
shot to center mass; the bullet entered somewhere in his back above his
right hip and lodged somewhere in his torso, which buckled him over and
hampered his ability to run. He got to the window and did the only thing
he could think of, he lifted both arms to the square at either side of
his head and shouted “O Lord, my god, is there no help for the widows
son?” the Masonic distress call. Many of the men in the mob were
Freemasons as were most of the leading politicians like Governor Ford.
When Mormon loyalist Dan Jones told Governor Ford that Jo and Hyrum were
Master Masons and required his protection before Jones himself was
chased out of Carthage that morning, Jones was invoking the distress of
the brotherhood in hopes Ford would take more seriously the threats to
the lives of his fellow Master Masons. It was a threat. Jo did the same
while dangling out the window and accounts differ as to what happened
immediately after. Most accounts say he was fatally shot and fell
lifeless out of the window, others say he jumped from the window and was
executed, yet another account that’s disputed claims he was in the
window for 3 to 4 minutes essentially bargaining with the men in the
courtyard while the men in the room continued to keep their guns aimed
at him.

Here’s the sequence of events as best as I can piece them together.
After taking the first bullet, Jo went to the window and made the
Masonic distress call. There was a momentary pause in the shooting as
this was a very powerful invocation. The Masons in the mob now knew they
were about to assassinate a fellow Mason and the non-Masons in the crowd
knew they were about to take the life of a Master Mason, which might
carry deadly consequences for them if they went through with it. The
oaths of fealty sworn to by Masons are taken very seriously, especially
at this time in frontier America. This brief pause forced everybody to
think for a minute, all while Jo was bleeding from the gunshot wound to
his back, possibly having some organ failure and tunnel-vision.

Levi Williams was in the crowd surrounded by his men in the courtyard
while his men were in the room with their guns trained on the prophet
sitting on the window sill crying out for mercy. He yelled “Shoot him\!
G-d d—n him\! Shoot the dam’d rascal\!” and his men inside the room
responded appropriately. They fired again and another bullet struck true
in Jo’s right side, causing him to recoil and fall out the window. This
was a fall of 2 stories onto hard dirt. He fell head-first and hit the
ground with his left shoulder and head making first contact and his feet
hitting soon after. This fall likely broke his neck and caused brain
damage, but it wasn’t actually fatal. The prophet lay face down in the
dirt of the Carthage Jail courtyard, struggling for consciousness, one
or two bullets lodged in his body. He tried to push himself up but was
too crippled from the gunshots and fall to be able to move himself. Levi
Williams, or some unidentified kid, dragged Joseph Smith, bleeding,
dying, in excruciating pain, a few feet across the dirt to the center of
the courtyard where they propped him up leaning against the bricks of a
well.

As he was being dragged through the dust, the men who chased him out of
the window to begin with quickly evacuated the jail in order to witness
the lynching they were all taking part in. The jail emptied of the men
who’d pushed through the door and as they ran down the stairs and into
the courtyard, the 50-60 men of the Carthage Greys finally arrived at
the jail, having run the quarter mile from their encampment, to find out
what all the commotion was.

Levi Williams, and some men including Jacob Davis, and William Grover,
gathered around the broken and dying Jo. At this point, I can only
assume Jo was begging for his life as I doubt that at any time during
the previous 3 minutes he’d accepted his fate. A group of men gathered
around him and at least two of them pointed their rifles at his chest,
pulled their triggers, and murdered him by sending two to four more
bullets smashing through his torso and vital organs. “The fire was
simultaneous. A slight cringe of the body was all the indication of pain
that he betrayed when the balls struck him. He fell upon his face.”
Given all his injuries from the previous few minutes, this was an act of
mercy.

Kinda poetic, isn’t it? Joseph Smith started his magical journey by
finding his famed brown seer stone while digging a well, he gave his
most impactful and famed speech at the funeral of a man who died digging
a well, and a well was the last conscious sensation he felt pressing
against his back as he was gunned down by these men.

The upper apartment had been abandoned by the assailants who immediately
clamored down the stairs to witness the lynching firsthand. As they
emptied the room, Willard Richards ran to the window Jo fell out of and
looked at the scene below him long enough to witness the men dragging Jo
to the well for his execution. He assessed the situation and tried to
find an escape, but no exit of the jail was unobserved by the enemies
around the jail. Richards would be unable to escape, even though he was
unharmed. He saw the motionless body of Hyrum with a puddle of blood
beneath his head and neck, seeping through the floorboards to the
kitchen below. He saw the splattered blood and bone fragments on the
wall from John Taylor and probably assumed he was dead. He turned to
leave the room in an attempt to find a hiding place, somewhere,
anywhere. But, as he was about to step out of the door, he heard a weak
cry from under the bed, “Stop, Doctor, and take me along”. Whether this
voice was reassuring to hear, or distressing, we can’t imagine what was
going through the mind of Willard Richards. Or the mind of the man who
said those words, for that matter.

He turned around and looked under the bed. John Taylor was a mess. He
was absolutely covered in blood, his left leg was bleeding profusely,
his arm was unusable, the shattered bones of his left hip joint
completely exposed to open air. Taylor didn’t see out the window what
Richards had just witnessed, the execution of their supreme leader. He
exclaimed to John Taylor, “Oh\! Brother Taylor, is it possible that they
have killed both Brother Hyrum and Joseph? It cannot surely be, and yet
I saw them shoot them;”. He was an absolute wreck and he apparently said
a little prayer “elevating his hands two or three times,... \[saying\]
‘Oh Lord, my God, spare Thy servants\!’”.

Willard Richards was a Thomsonian herbal physician, not a surgeon. He’d
never seen this level of carnage and pain his entire life, but he did
what he could with what he had. John Taylor wasn’t in control of
himself, he was probably in shock at this time with that characteristic
thousand-yard stare, so it was all on Willard Richards to get both men
to safety. Richards took an extreme risk in helping John Taylor. He
said, “Brother Taylor, this is a terrible event\[\!\]” while pulling him
from underneath the bed. Richards was a big guy of over 300 pounds while
Taylor was relatively small. Richards picked Taylor up and brought him
to the adjacent room with the jail cells. Richards put Taylor in one of
the cells, filled the wounds with straw while saying, “I am sorry I can
not do better for you;” after which Richards grabbed a dirty old straw
mattress and put it on top of John Taylor to hopefully conceal him from
anybody entering the jail cells looking for the rest of the Mormons.
Richards told John Taylor while concealing him, “That may hide you, and
you may yet live to tell the tale, but I expect they will kill me in a
few moments\!” Taylor recounts, “While lying in this position, I
suffered the most excruciating pain.”

After concealing John Taylor, Willard Richards ran back into the
apartment and looked out the window again “to see if there were any
signs of life, regardless of my own, determined to see the end of him I
loved”. There was no sign of life, Joseph Smith was a corpse. He
understood the reality of the situation and resigned himself to his
likely fate of a similar execution. He returned to the jail cell where
he concealed John Taylor and awaited the arrival of the mob back up the
stairs.

Jo was dead and the mob knew that Hyrum had been hit, but they weren’t
sure of it. They ran back up the stairs, surely causing Willard Richards
to go into a panic, and they found Hyrum lying motionless on the floor
with a bullet hole in his face and exit wound on the back of his neck.
There was a pool of blood under his head and his right shoulder also had
a considerable amount of blood. The men ran into the room and shot him 3
more times to ensure he was actually dead. These bullets entered his
back, an arm, a leg, and his torso to the left of his naval. The shot
which entered his back passed completely through his body and smashed
his pocketwatch, completely destroying it. What is curious about these
shots is Hyrum didn’t seem to bleed out of them at all. The shot which
passed through his skull, out his jaw, into and out of his neck, it left
a massive blood stain on his shirt that day, so much so that somebody
cut a large chunk of the fabric out, possibly because it was so
gruesome, possibly out of a sense of preserving the material which had
the most amount of blood and flesh material on it. However, all these
other holes in his clothes don’t contain any bloodstains nor any
evidence that blood was ever washed from the areas. This can really only
mean that Hyrum had completely bled out from his head and neck wound
before these shots, which would mean he was dead for a few minutes
before the men returned to the upper room and put these other bullets in
him. This means Jo was in the windowsill and the courtyard for as long
as 5-7 minutes before he was executed and the mob returned to Hyrum to
make sure he was dead.

After these gratuitous bullets ripped through Hyrum’s corpse, a cry was
heard outside from an unknown person “The Mormons are coming\!” and the
men immediately flew down the stairs and scattered in all directions
from Carthage jail. Maybe it was Willard Richards who yelled it from the
other room. In the space of about 5-7 minutes, from Frank Worrel
shooting his blank rounds at Levi’s men to those men fleeing all
directions from the jail out of fear of the Nauvoo Legion, the deed was
done. A disputed account claims a young man attempted to decapitate Jo
but a pillar of light scared him off, but the account is full of plenty
of other details too ridiculous to believe and actually served to hinder
the prosecution against the assailants the following year. That same
account claims Willard Richards stood in the middle of the room and
blocked the bullets with a magic wand like a Jedi; it’s pretty humorous.
Jo’s body lay a broken shell with multiple bullet holes, possibly broken
bones including his neck, slumped against the well in the courtyard of
the jail. John Taylor’s wounds were beginning to coagulate as he lay in
excruciating pain under the dirty old straw mattress; Willard Richards
waited in the jail cell near the dying John Taylor; “I expected to be
shot the next moment, and stood before the door awaiting the onset.”
But, the men never came. The Nauvoo Legion never came. Brigadier-General
Deming, who was personally appointed by Governor Ford to guard the jail,
never came. Levi Williams who put this bloodbath into motion never came.
Dan Jones, Stephen Markham, John Fullmer, Cyrus Wheelock, any Mormon
loyalists never came. Willard Richards was all alone in that building
with two dead friends and a third on his way in and out of
consciousness.

All told, 35 bullets were found lodged in the plaster of the walls and
ceiling of the room, Jo had at least 4 bullets in him, Hyrum had at
least 4 bullets in him, a fifth if he used his single-shot pistol on
himself which is entirely possible, John Taylor had 4, a gun went off in
the kitchen as the men were pushing past George Stigall, the jailor, Jo
fired 3 or 4 rounds from his pepperbox pistol smuggled in by Cyrus
Wheelock, Hyrum discharged his bullet from his single shot pistol
smuggled in by John S. Fullmer, an unknown number of bullets were fired
up the stairway toward the jail door before the assailants realized the
men were in the apartment instead of the jail, Frank Worrel and his boys
in their feigned defense of the jail fired 4 blank rounds at the
attackers, and then an unknown number of balls bounced off the stone of
the building outside, leaving small dents. Best estimates place the
number of shots fired in that short period between 75-100 rounds,
although those estimates are understandably squishy.

As the mob fled, the citizens of Carthage only heard the report of
gunfire at the jail and didn’t know what had happened. The Carthage
Greys were packing up camp, Levi Williams’s men were scattering quickly;
until the citizens came upon the jail there’s no telling what had
happened. Understandably, many thought the Mormons had attacked to break
their prophet out of jail, but when they got to the jail, that notion
was quickly corrected. As the mob scattered they undoubtedly hollered
out the prophet is dead, the damned rascal is shot, and all sorts of
triumphant cries to anybody in earshot range.

This only meant one thing, and it’s exactly what everybody including
Governor Thomas Ford believed when he departed for Nauvoo that morning,
the Mormons may not be here in Carthage right now, but as soon as word
made it to Nauvoo, they would be. The wrath of 3,500 religious zealots
with nothing more to lose would descend on Carthage before daybreak; the
city would be burned to the ground and the Mormons would salt the earth
in their wake before moving on to Warsaw and doing the same. After 5
years of construction, the Mormon war machine was literally built for an
occasion just like this, but could it run without a pilot fueled only by
the pure rage of vengeance and retribution?

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> The moment the work was done, the calmness of horror succeeded the
> fever of fanatical rage. The assassins hurried away from the jail, and
> took the road to Warsaw in silence and haste. They went home at a
> killing pace over the wide dusty prairie. Warsaw is eighteen miles
> from Carthage; the Smiths were killed at half past five: at a quarter
> before eight the returning crowd began to drag their weary limbs
> through the main street of Warsaw, — at such an astounding rate of
> speed had the lash of their own thoughts driven them.
> 
> The town was instantly put in such attitude of defence as its limited
> means permitted. The women and children were ferried across the river
> to a village on the Missouri shore. The men kept guard night and day
> in the hazel thickets around the town. Everybody expected sudden and
> exemplary vengeance from the Mormons.

The wife of the captain of the Carthage Greys remembers the weeks
leading up to and the instant terror after gunfire was heard throughout
the town. Her husband, Robert F. Smith, was captain of the Greys who
were tasked with guarding the city by Governor Ford. Deming oversaw the
jail guard specifically, Robert F. Smith was captain of the Greys
guarding the city. He was also the justice of the peace overseeing the
legal hearings during this whole affair so he was understandably busy
and possibly not the best guy to be captain over the Greys.

Mrs. Robert F. Smith, “A Short Sketch of the Trials of Mrs. R. F. Smith
at the Killing of the Smiths, The Mormans Profphet,” holograph, SC 1434,
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library, Springfield, Illinois.
(Misspellings in title and numerous transpositions of letters and
misspellings in narrative retained as in original.)

> That day \[June 27, 1844\] I was unusually depressed and out of sorts.
> \[I\] had been living in almost constant dred terror of the Mormans
> for years and never knwen from day to day and hardly from one hour to
> another, what dreadfull catastrophe would happen and when the rumor
> reached me about half past two P.M. that a mob had collected on the
> prairie some a few miles out and were on the road to Carthage. Some
> thought they were Mormans comeing to liberate the Smiths from jail and
> and \[sic\] would destroy the town and every thing in it. My neighbors
> began to make preperations to leave their homes with their families
> and the part of town where I lived was soon entirely deserted but
> myself. . . . \[My husband\] had not been home a single night for two
> weeks. He with his men had been keeping gard of the town day and night
> all that time. . . . \[She dressed and sent her six children to
> friends’ houses one block away and about an hour later she heard
> gunfire.\] \[I\] was powerless to move for a minute or so. When I
> became conscious there was a Morman girl, who lived in the
> neighborhood, standing in the door. I was holding on to the bench of
> my chair and she was ringing her hands and saying ‘Oh my God\! Mrs.
> Smith they are shooting the men down at the jail and throwing them out
> of the window. . . . All brought word of what terrible revenge the
> Mormans were going to take on the Carthage people for killing the
> Smiths. They were frightened and beleaved all the stories they heard.

Word of what happened immediately hit every ear in Carthage and every
citizen began packing up and heading to Warsaw within the hour. Thomas
L. Barnes was the coroner of Carthage and he immediately went to the
jail to make his examination of the crime scene. He sent 2 letters to
his daughter remembering the scene 50 years from when it happened. He
describes the shootout and the situation in which he found each of the
victims.

> The attacing party forced the door open and commenced firing at Smith
> it is said they must have hit him an probably disabled him, as he
> stagered across the floor to the oposite side of the room where there
> was a window. It is said that there he gave the hailing sign of the
> distress of a Mason but that did him no good. In the room behind him
> was armed men, furious men, with murder in their hearts. Before him
> arround the well under the window there was a croud of desperate men,
> as he was receiving shots from behind which he could not stand, in
> despersation he leaped or rather fell out of the window near the well
> where he breathed his last. When I found him soon afterwards he was
> laying in the hall at the foot of the stairs where his blood had as I
> believe left indelible stain on the floor.
> 
> … Taylor was severely wounded Richards was not hurt. Shall I try to
> describe the wounds that Taylor received and got over them. Well let
> me tell you where we found him, I cannot impress your mind of his
> appearance as he appered to us when we wer called to him by the
> jailor. We found him in a pile of straw. It appeared that a straw bed
> had been emtied in the cell where he was when we found him. He was
> very much frightened as well as severly wounded. It took strong
> persuading of the jailor as well as our positive assuriance that we
> ment him no harm but Was desirous of doing him some good. He finally
> consented to come out of his cell… The wounds had bled quite freely,
> the blood had had time to coagulate which it had done, and where the
> clothes and straw came in contact they all adhered together so that
> Mr. Taylor came out his self sought cell he was a pitable looking
> sight. We took the best care of him we could till he left us. He got
> well but never paid us for skill or good wishes...
> 
> After we were through with Taylor I went to Richards and said to him
> Richards what does all this mean who done it. Said he, doctor I do not
> know, but I belive it was some Missourians that came over and have
> killed brothers Josef and Hyrum and wounded bro Taylor. Said I to him
> do you believe that, he said I do. Says I, will you write that down
> and send it to Nauvoo. He said he would if he could get any person to
> take it. I told him if he would write it I would send it. He wrote the
> note, I found the man that took it to Nauvoo.

With the help of Coroner Barnes, the Jailor, George Stigall, and the
town’s hotel owner, Artois Hamilton, Willard Richards conveyed the Smith
bodies and the bleeding John Taylor to Hamilton hotel just a few blocks
away from the jail. Here they provided their examination and stopped
John Taylor’s bleeding. It was important to get a message to Nauvoo. It
was only a matter of time before word reached Nauvoo that Jo and Hyrum
were dead, John Taylor probably dead as well and the whereabouts of
Willard Richards being unknown. How the Mormons would respond was a
question mark for everybody, even the Mormons themselves. If Richards
could get word to the Mormon leadership before any other messenger, he
may be able to prevent the counties from devolving into immediate civil
war, which many dreamed about but nobody actually wanted. Complicating
matters further, the leadership of the church was scattered all over the
nation. The centralized hierarchy of Mormonism was separated by hundreds
or thousands of miles and could do nothing to coordinate and handle the
situation with any sense of deliberation or restraint. The people in
Nauvoo who were high-ranking Mormon leaders, the men the Mormons would
listen to, was scarce and the men of the Nauvoo Legion would be thirsty
for blood of the men who killed their prophet and patriarch.

For all these reasons and so many terrifying unknowns, Carthage became a
ghost town. Beyond that, Governor Ford was just wrapping up his public
speech in Nauvoo telling the Mormons that if anything happens that would
interfere with the prosecution of their leaders, the blame would be on
their heads. A little more misbehavior and the whole state would burn
Nauvoo to ash. For unknown reasons, while Governor Ford was giving his
speech, a tension, a feeling of unease, plagued the Mormon community.
Samuel Smith, Jo’s youngest surviving brother, rode out from Nauvoo
headed for Carthage just a little ahead of Governor Ford and his detail.
After nearly 3 hours of moving the bodies, examining them, and
stabilizing John Taylor, Willard Richards sat down to pen this note
addressed to Governor Ford, Gen. Johnathan Dunham head of the Nauvoo
Legion, Col. Stephen Markham who’d been chased out of Carthage that
morning, and Emma Smith, Jo’s first wife.

> Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded, not very badly. I am well.
> Our guard was forced, as we believe, by a band of Missourians from 1
> to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled towards
> Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens here are
> afraid of the mormons attacking them; I promise them No\!
> 
> W. RICHARDS
> 
> N.B. The citizens promise us protection; alarm guns have been fired.
> 
> JOHN TAYLOR

This letter was handed to the coroner, Thomas Barnes, who gave it to his
brothers, William and John, who were understandably afraid to go to
Nauvoo bearing such news, believing the Mormons would kill the
messengers and return to murder their families in Carthage. Those guys
instead took the letter to an Arza Adams a few miles north of Carthage
who agreed to carry it with the help of a Benjamin Leyland, who knew the
roads and could avoid any troops on the road between Nauvoo and
Carthage, be they Mormons or mobocrats.

They set out for Nauvoo around 9 p.m., but 2 men carrying the news
without Willard Richards’s warning to not attack Carthage were already
on their way to Nauvoo to spread the word. Governor Ford had left Nauvoo
around 6 p.m. and was headed with his detail toward Carthage, suspecting
an attack might be made. He left one of his boys, a Captain Singleton,
in Nauvoo to control the Nauvoo Legion. He met these two messengers on
the road headed to Nauvoo, George D. Grant, a Mormon, and David
Bettisworth, the Carthage constable who had the arrest warrants for Jo
and the 17 other men who burned the Expositor printing press which led
to this whole affair to begin with. These messengers bearing the bad
news were only a couple miles outside Nauvoo when they were intercepted
by Governor Ford and his men.

Ford:

> A short time before sundown we departed on our return to Carthage.
> When we had proceeded two miles we met two individuals, one of them a
> Mormon, who informed us that the Smiths had been assassinated in jail,
> about five or six o’clock of that day. The intelligence seemed to
> strike every one with a kind of dumbness. As to myself, it was
> perfectly astounding; and I anticipated the very worst consequences
> from it. The Mormons had been represented to me as a lawless,
> infatuated, and fanatical people, not governed by the ordinary motives
> which influence the rest of mankind. If so, most likely an
> exterminating war would ensue, and the whole land would be covered
> with desolation.
> 
> Acting upon this supposition, it was my duty to provide as well as I
> could for the event. I therefore ordered the two messengers into
> custody, and to be returned with us to Carthage. This was done to get
> time to make such arragements\[sic\] as could be made, and to prevent
> any sudden explosion of Mormon excitement before they could be written
> to by their friends at Carthage. I also despatched messengers to
> Warsaw, to advise the citizens of the event. But the people there knew
> all about the matter before my messengers arrived. They, like myself,
> anticipated a general attack all over the country. The women and
> children were removed across the river; and a committee was despatched
> that night to Quincy for assistance.

Governor Ford was now in complete damage control mode. For the moment,
Hancock County was a contained oil fire, now he just needed to keep it
from spreading for the fires to actually catch and send the whole state
into war. Ford took the messengers into custody to bring them back to
Carthage with him; the longer he could keep the news from the Mormons
the more time he had to evacuate Carthage and take control of the
situation to suffocate the flames. Governor Ford and his men immediately
went to Hamilton’s hotel where the bodies and John Taylor lay under the
care of Coroner Barnes and Willard Richards.

They arrived around 10 p.m., where Governor Ford was able to get the
story straight from the Coroner and Willard Richards himself. Jo’s
younger brother, Samuel Smith, had arrived at the hotel to see his dead
older brothers just ahead of the Governor and his men. Ford asked
Richards and Samuel Smith to pen an addendum to the message Richards
sent earlier with Arza Adams and Benjamin Leyland, in hopes the second
message would reassure the Mormons that an attack on Carthage was a
terrible idea.

> To Mrs. Emma Smith, and Maj. Gen. Dunham \&c.:--
> 
> The Governor has just arrived; says all things shall be inquired into,
> and all right measures taken.
> 
> I say to all the citizens of Nauvoo, my brethren, be still; and know
> that *God reigns*. *Don’t rush out of the city*--don’t rush to
> Carthage; stay at home, and be prepared for an attack from Missouri
> mobbers. The Governor will render every assistance possible--has sent
> out order for troops. Joseph and Hyrum are dead, **but not by the
> Carthage people--the guards were true as I believe**. We will prepare
> to move the bodies as soon as possible.
> 
> The people of the country are greatly excited, and fear the Mormons
> will come out and take vengeance. I have pledged my word the Mormons
> will stay at home as soon as they can be informed, and no violence
> will be on their part, and say to my brethren in Nauvoo, in the name
> of the Lord--be still--be patient; only let such friends as choose
> come here to see the bodies. Mr. Taylor’s wounds are dressed, and not
> serious. I am sound.
> 
> WILLARD RICHARDS,
> 
> JOHN TAYLOR,
> 
> SAMUEL H. SMITH
> 
> Defend yourselves until protection can be furnished necessary. June
> 27th, 1844.
> 
> THOMAS FORD
> 
> Governor and Commander-in-Chief.

Governor Ford now had the unenviable task of keeping the peace, learning
the facts, and commanding militias all over the state who’d already
committed mutiny or held only the words of their dead supreme leader as
the law. Governor Ford credits this letter we just read as being the
only thing that kept the Mormons from marching out and destroying
Carthage and Warsaw that very night.

> Here also I found Dr. Richards and John Taylor, two of the principal
> Mormon leaders, who had been in the jail at the time of the attack,
> and who voluntarily addressed a most pacific exhortation to their
> fellow-citizens, which was the first intelligence of the murder which
> was received at Nauvoo. I think it very probable that the subsequent
> good conduct of the Mormons is attributable to the arrest of the
> messengers, and to the influence of this letter.

Governor Ford released the messengers he’d taken into custody a few
miles outside Nauvoo and Mormon George D. Grant immediately departed
Carthage at a gallop carrying this letter Ford credits with keeping a
lid on the state from exploding into civil war. He came within 2 miles
of Nauvoo at the same time another person in Nauvoo was acting on
suspicions of foul play. Orrin Pistol Packin’ Porter Rockwell had been
uneasy about Governor Ford’s speech that evening and was unable to
sleep. He decided to go to Carthage that night, set to arrive sometime
before daybreak of June 28th. However, as Porter was about a mile and a
half outside of Nauvoo on the road to Carthage, he ran into George D.
Grant, carrying the message penned by Richards, Samuel Smith, Taylor,
and Governor Ford. George Grant told Pistol Packin’ Port what he knew,
that Porter’s childhood friends from Palmyra and men he’d sworn absolute
fealty to protect, were dead. “Who was in charge of the troops?” Porter
asked Grant. “Worrell. Frank Worrell” Grant replied breathlessly.

The name of Frank Worrel would forever be burned into the mind of Porter
Rockwell. After the conversation, Pistol Packin’ Porter wheeled his
horse around and sprinted for Nauvoo. George Grant’s horse was exhausted
from the gallop from Carthage, Porter’s horse was still fresh. It was
about 3 to 4 in the morning and Porter reached the outskirts of Nauvoo,
shouting at the top of his lungs. “Joseph is killed--they have killed
him\! Goddamn them\! They have killed him\!” Still a few hours before
daybreak, Mormons slowly roused at the panicked shrieks from Port and
the thunderous pound of hooves as he canvassed every street in town to
raise the alarm. This is Porter Rockwell’s famous ride through Nauvoo,
waking thousands of people from their slumber at 3 in the morning with
the cry that they’ve killed the prophet, the name Frank Worrel etched
into the folds of his consciousness.

Governor Ford had done enough to gain the trust of the Mormons through
this whole affair. With the letter telling the Mormons to rest easy and
let the Governor handle it cosigned by the Governor himself, Jo’s
younger brother Samuel, and the two survivors of the attack, the
intelligence spread through the Mormon community, causing a sense of
uneasiness coupled with the turmoil and despair of losing Jo and Hyrum.
Many simply didn’t believe it, others thought Governor Ford was
responsible, others were gearing up for an assault on Carthage in spite
of the orders. Nauvoo was utter chaos. Governor Ford understood the mob
made the attack exactly when he was in Nauvoo with the hopes the Mormons
would blame him and kill him on the spot.

> As for myself, I was well convinced that those, whoever they were, who
> assassinated the Smiths, meditated in turn my assassination by the
> Mormons. The very circumstances of the case fully corroborated the
> information which I afterwards received, that upon consultation of the
> assassins it was agreed amongst them that the murder must be committed
> whilst the governor was at Nauvoo; that the Mormons would naturally
> supposed that he had planned it; and that in the first outpouring of
> their indignation, they would assassinate him, by way of retaliation.
> And that thus they would get clear of the Smiths and the governor, all
> at once. They also supposed, that if they could so contrive the matter
> as to have the governor of the State assassinated by the Mormons, the
> public excitement would be greatly increased against that people, and
> would result in their expulsion from the State at least.

It was the plan all along. Murder Jo and Hyrum while Governor Ford was
in Carthage, send a messenger to Nauvoo before Ford left with knowledge
of the murders, the Mormons would retaliate by murdering Governor Ford
like they’d done with Governor Boggs, and then the anti-Mormons would
point to Ford’s assassination and use it as a rally cry against the
Mormons to drive them out of Illinois. The Mormons existed in a state of
confusion and mourning, but the anti-Mormons in Carthage and Warsaw
sought to capitalize on the public confusion by weaving their own
narrative. Notably, within 5 hours of the gunfight in the jail, Carthage
was almost completely a ghost town and all the people fled to Warsaw or
were ferried across the Mississippi from Warsaw to Missouri, as Missouri
would provide complete and absolute protection against the Mormons.

Thomas Sharp, who may have been part of the attack or may not have been,
the evidence is inconclusive, printed his version of the events in an
extra of the Warsaw Signal the night of the gunfight, which was
immediately circulated beginning around 9-10 that same night. The
anti-Mormons began controlling the narrative using propaganda within
hours of the event happening, claiming it started by a Mormon trying to
break the prisoners out. Remember, it was the Warsaw Signal and Thomas
Sharp’s own words which had initially called on the citizens to
exterminate the Mormons; that was the endgame here. The Governor of
Illinois was merely a sacrificial pawn in this game if all went
according to the plan of Thomas Sharp and Levi Williams.

> EXTRA
> 
> Joe and Hiram Smith are dead -- shot this afternoon. An attack from
> the Mormons is expected every hour. Will not the surrounding counties
> rush instantly to our rescue?
> 
> Warsaw, June 27, 1844.
> 
> It seems that the circumstances attending the killing of the Mormon
> Prophet and his brother Hiram are as follows: On yesterday, Gov. Ford
> left Carthage with about one hundred and twenty soldiers, for the
> purpose of taking possession of the "Nauvoo Legion," and their arms.
> They arrived at Nauvoo about noon, and called for the assembling of
> the Legion and their arms. -- They arrived at Nauvoo about noon and
> called for the assembling of the Legion. About 2000 men with arms
> immediately responded to the call. These troops were put under command
> of Col. Singleton of the Brown county, who accompanied Gov. Ford to
> Nauvoo.
> 
> The Governor finding all quiet left Nauvoo about 5 o'clock P. M., with
> a company of 60 men for the purpose of encamping about seven miles
> from the city.
> 
> At about the same time that Gov. Ford left Nauvoo, the Prophet and his
> brother were killed at Carthage, under the following circumstances, as
> near as we can ascertain them: --
> 
> Joe and Hiram are both confined in the debtors room of the Carthage
> jail, awaiting their trial on a charge of treason. The jail was
> strongly guarded by soldiers and anti-Mormons who had been placed
> there by the Governor.
> 
> A Mormon attempted to rush by the guards for the purpose of forcing
> his way in the jail. He was opposed by the guard, and fired a pistol
> at one of the guards, giving him a slight wound.
> 
> A general confusion ensued in the crowd around the jail. Joe and his
> fellow Mormon prisoners, it seems, had provided themselves with
> pistols, and commenced firing upon the guards within. He then
> attempted to escape by the window, when a hundred balls entered his
> body, and he fell \[a\] lifeless corpse.
> 
> His brother Hiram shared the same fate. Richards, a leading Mormon,
> was badly wounded. There our intelligence ends -- what took place
> after this, God only knows. Mormons immediately left for Nauvoo, to
> carry news of the death of the Prophet. It is feared that the Mormons
> at Nauvoo will be so exasperated as to exterminate the Governor and
> his small force.
> 
> The Boreas brought down most of the women and children from Warsaw
> \[Carthage\] . It is feared their town is in ashes before this.
> 
> Our citizens were aroused this morning by the ringing of bells and a
> call to arms. Our three independent companies are already in marching
> order. Maj. Flood has ordered out the militia of the regiment, and the
> steamer Boreas is waiting to convey them to the scene of action.
> 
> There is no knowing where this dreadful affair will end. Many have
> expressed fears that our city is in danger, because most of the Warsaw
> \[Carthage\] families have taken refuge here -- but we believe there
> is no danger, we are too far from the scene of action.
> 
> Messengers have just left for Hannibal and the towns below for the
> purpose of arousing the Missourians. The excitement in our city is
> intense and the anxiety to hear the fate of Gov. Ford and his men are
> very great.

And just like that, the beginning of the propaganda was kicked into
motion. It became the cry of the anti-Mormons that Mormons stormed the
jail to break out the prisoners and the prisoners were killed to prevent
their escape. There is absolutely no evidence for this and the person
writing the article, Thomas Sharp, knew it was a lie when he printed it.
Governor Ford reflects on this time with a great deal of wisdom and
calculation as he attempted to balance mutually opposed interests of the
Mormons and anti-Mormons.

> \[The citizens of Warsaw\], like myself, anticipated a general attack
> all over the country. The women and children were removed across the
> river; and a committee was despatched that night to Quincy for
> assistance. The next morning by daylight the ringing of the bells in
> the city of Quincy, announced a public meeting. The people assembled
> in great numbers at an early hour. The Warsaw committee stated to the
> meeting that a party of Mormons had attempted to rescue the Smiths out
> of jail; that a party of Missourians and others, had killed the
> prisoners to prevent their escape; that the governor and his party
> were at Nauvoo at the time when intelligence of the fact was brought
> there; that they had been attacked by the Nauvoo legion, and had
> retreated to a house where they were then closely besieged. That the
> governor had sent out word that he could maintain his position for two
> days, and would be certain to be massacred if assistance did not
> arrive by the end of that time. It is unnecessary to say that this
> entire story was a fabrication. It was of a piece with the other
> reports put into circulation by the anti-Mormon party, to influence
> the public mind and call the people to their assistance. The effect of
> it, however, was that by ten o’clock on the 28th of June, between two
> and three hundred men from Quincy, under the command of Major Flood,
> embarked on board of a steamboat for Nauvoo, to assist in raising the
> siege, as they honestly believed…
> 
> Upon hearing of the assassination of the Smiths, I was sensible that
> my command was at an end; that my destruction was meditated as well as
> that of the Mormons; and that I could not reasonably confide longer in
> the one party or in the other.
> 
> The question then arose, what would be proper to be done. A war was
> expected by everybody. I was desirous of preserving the peace. I could
> not put myself at the head of the Mormon force with any kind of
> propriety, and without exciting greater odium against them than
> already existed. I could not put myself at the head of the anti-Mormon
> party, because they had justly forfeited my confidence, and my command
> over them was put an end to by mutiny and treachery. I could not put
> myself at the head of either of these forces, because both of them in
> turn had violated the law; and, as I then believed, meditated further
> aggression. It appeared to me that if a war ensued, I ought to have a
> force in which I could confide, and that I ought to establish my
> head-quarters at a place where I could learn the truth as to what was
> going on.

Governor Ford resolved Quincy would be the location he’d post up to try
and keep the tensions from exploding from that point. He arrived in
Quincy the morning of the 29th of June, the day which was on the docket
book to hold the hearing for the Smith brothers on charges of riot and
treason. Ford also notes that even though the Smith brothers were dead
“It appeared that the anti-Mormon party had not relinquished their
hostility to the Mormons, nor their determination to expel them,” but he
also notes that the time of year bought him a little bit of time to get
things in order. “But \[the anti-Mormons\] had deferred further
operations until the fall season, after they had finished their summer’s
work on their farms.”

As Governor Ford was organizing his men for the trip to Quincy, Willard
Richards commissioned Artois Hamilton, the owner of the hotel where the
bodies had been taken and Richards was helping Taylor recover, to build
2 pine boxes for the bodies. They were completed by 7 the morning of
June 28th. It was a sleepless night for everybody involved except
probably John Taylor who Doctor Richards undoubtedly gave something to
put him to sleep. With the help of Artois Hamilton and the younger Smith
brother, Samuel, Willard Richards placed the bodies of Hyrum and Joseph
in the pine boxes, placed them in two wagons, and left Carthage for
Nauvoo “about 8 a.m.”. General Deming, who’d been tasked by the Governor
to oversee the jail guard operations and fled when Levi Williams’s
troops entered the city, gave the men a detachment of 8 armed soldiers
to escort the bodies to Nauvoo, which they covered with tree branches to
protect them from the sun.

The Nauvoo city marshal, John P. Greene, organized the procession to
receive the bodies. The wagons and escort arrived in Nauvoo about 3 p.m.
where, “several thousands of the citizens were there, amid the most
solemn lamentations and wailings that ever ascended into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, to be avenged of their enemies.”

As the thousands of people received the procession, “Dr. Richards
admonished the people to keep the peace, stating that he had pledged his
honor and his life for their good conduct, when the people with one
united voice resolved to trust to the law for a remedy of such a
high-handed assassination, and when that failed, to call upon God to
avenge them of their wrongs.

O\! Americans, weep, for the glory of freedom has departed.”

The bodies were taken to the Nauvoo Mansion, where Dimick B. Huntington,
William Brutus Marks, and William D. Huntington, washed and examined the
bodies. They noted “Joseph was shot in the right breast, also under the
heart, in the lower part of his bowels on the right side, and on the big
wrinkle on the back part of his right hip. One ball had come out at the
right shoulder-blade.” During this time, George Cannon made a plaster
cast of the faces of Hyrum and Jo, from which he would make two copies
of their death masks. The bullet wound to Hyrum’s face above his left
nostril can be seen as a blemish on his death mask today in the church
history museum.

The Governor does spend a bit of time commenting on the immense
pressures surrounding his handling of the situation, pressures which
extended far beyond the Mormon and anti-Mormons into the national
political sphere.

> I had scarcely arrived at the scene of action before the whig press
> commenced the most violent abuse, and attributed to me the basest
> motives. It was alleged in the Sangamon Journal, and repeated in the
> other whig newspapers, that the governor had merely gone over to
> cement an alliance with the Mormons; that the leaders would not be
> brought to punishment, but that a full privilege would be accorded to
> them to commit crimes of every hue and grade, in return for their
> support of the democratic party. I mention this, not by way of
> complaint, for it is only the privilege of the minority to complain,
> but for its influence upon the people.
> 
> I observed that I was narrowly watched in all my proceedings by my
> whig fellow-citizens, and was suspected of an intention to favor the
> Mormons. I felt that I did not possess the confidence of the men I
> commanded, and that they had been induced to withhold it by the
> promulgation of the most abominable falsehoods. I felt the necessity
> of possessing their confidence, in order to give vigor to my action;
> and exerted myself in every way to obtain it, so that I could control
> the excited multitude who were under my command. I succeeded better
> for a time than could have been expected; but who can control the
> action of a mob without possessing their entire confidence? It is
> true, also, that some unprincipled democrats all the time appeared to
> be very busy on the side of the Mormons, and this circumstance was
> well calculated to increase suspicious of every one who had the name
> of democrat.

There were so many motives, political and otherwise, that Governor Ford
had to balance here, and his group of trusted militia commanders
constantly shrunk around him as the situation escalated. He bore the
blame in the mind of every Mormon for the deaths of Jo and Hyrum when I
can barely see an error in his decision-making. He bore the blame from
the non-Mormons for being too cozy with the Mormons. He was blamed by
his whig political opponents for trying to curry votes and blamed by the
democrats for sullying their name… They were the slaveholders at the
time and they were like, hey, Tommy Ford, you’re giving us a bad rap.
Maybe he shouldn’t have left Carthage for Nauvoo that morning, but he
needed to meet with the Mormons and convey to them the seriousness of
the situation, which he couldn’t do with the force of his own voice
through emissaries. He catches the blame for both his actions and for
perceived inactions and I don’t think it’s fair.

Similarly, Thomas Sharp catches a lot of blame for what the fire he
constantly spewed through the Warsaw Signal. I don’t think that’s
totally fair either because his articles about the Mormons were
reactionary, not proactive. He published in response to what was done by
the Mormons or intel he received that the Mormons didn’t want the rest
of the world to know. And to be even more fair to Sharp, Jo constantly
attacked him and the Warsaw Signal as lies and fake news through the
Mormon propaganda outlets. The best Sharp could do was retaliate with
more print about the Mormons. Maybe that fueled the Mormon persecution
complex because he was basically platforming them, but would it have
been better for him to completely ignore the dangerous ideas and
motivations of the Mormon theocracy? That’s a prescient discussion which
transcends any individual examples of despotism or populism. The
Federalist Papers discussed populism extensively because it's far from a
modern phenomena.

Some want to blame the Missourians because the public mind about the
Mormons was so deeply shaped and warped by what happened there that many
believe it was the same mobocratic spirit that carried from Missouri
into Illinois that spurned all the anti-Mormon rhetoric and publications
that eventually led to the Carthage gunfight. That’s a fair point to
make in the abstract but it’s rendered meaningless when viewed in the
larger context. The reason the anti-Mormon sentiment was similar in
Missouri and Illinois is because the Mormons were doing the same lawless
and theocratic stuff in both states, which brings me to the final focus
here; Joseph Smith.

Most of the people who learn the story of Carthage see Jo as the victim;
a persecuted religious leader attempting to bring the light and
knowledge of the one true gospel to the world, who was removed at the
time the lord saw fit for his greater plan of restoring the ancient
church to the world which was lost through the great apostasy. Yeah
religious persecution is certainly a component to what happened, but it
was such an ancillary issue when compared with everything else Joseph
Smith did to absolutely and unequivocally deserve the public
castigation. The real tragedy here is that he brought thousands of
people along that journey of persecution, pain, anguish, turmoil, abuse,
disease, and bloodshed. His followers were his victims, but such is the
plight of those who attach their identity to an unapologetic monster, a
populist tyrant like Joseph Smith. He was a wolf in wolves clothing that
caused the suffering of thousands of people for the sole purpose of
personal aggrandizement.

People want to blame ThomASS Sharp, Governor Ford, Levi Williams, Frank
Worrel, or Governor Lilburn Boggs for what happened in Carthage, but
every person trying to do so is wrong. They’re not just wrong, they’re
deluded to believe they’re right and nothing will change that belief.
Religion poisons everything and if Jo wasn’t a religious leader he’d
live in infamy as a militant demagogue, a tyrant who was assassinated
while running for President of the United States. But, because he’s not
just a tyrant, but the first prophet of this dispensation, who
translated unknown texts into scripture, revealed plain and precious
doctrines of the nature of god and the universe, created the one true
religion, nay, the last religion this world will ever need before the
second coming of the savior, he gets a free pass on theft, plaigiarism,
murder, adultery, violating his own commandments, forming assassin
squads or secret combinations if you will, committing treason, murder,
burning entire villages to the ground during campaigns of pillaging, and
raping children. He’s not guilty of any of those crimes, he simply
operates by the law of the lord, not the law of the land. He’s the worst
kind of tyrant, the religious kind. But, I suppose, rarely are tyrants
completely absent a religious component.

The simple fact is, if Jo’s legacy were attached to somebody who wasn’t
a religious leader, he’d be overwhelmingly condemned by any human being
with a modicum of humanistic morality. While we’re casting blame around
the room for Jo’s death, how about we put it where it belongs, on the
man himself. He was clearly the problem. He was the agitator. He was the
reason for all the perceived persecution; all the pain and suffering
experienced by thousands of people, now tens of millions; all of that
happened because of his own actions and desires. The great Mormon war
machine he’d built for nearly a decade and a half was suddenly left
without a pilot. Thousands of people were left directionless and at the
mercy of a tiny cabal of self-righteous professed holy men to use as
trading cards for the next Mormon exodus. It’s all a game, it was from
the beginning as much as it is today, and we all got played just like
the Nauvoo Mormons.

A final point to deal with. A lot of people want to put the blame for
this on Bloody Brigham Young. Let’s deal with this pervasive little coup
d'etat conspiracy theory quickly. No. He was 1,200 miles away holding a
conference. For him to have any hand in what happened, he’d have to be
responsible to some extent for the Nauvoo Expositor, for the city
council meeting which resolved to destroy the expositor, the riots that
followed, the arrest warrants filed by the circuit judge in Carthage,
and everything that followed it. He’d also need to have instantaneous
communication with Governor Ford, Colonel Levi Williams, Thomas Sharp,
Stephen Markham, and Frank Worrel, which wouldn’t exist for a couple
more decades. Coordinating messages that far took weeks; the dude didn’t
even know the Expositor was published when he received the news Jo and
Hyrum were dead 2 weeks after it happened. That’s how long it took for
news to spread across the nation. Oh, maybe he wasn’t actually in Boston
and that was all a rouse\! He was meeting people out there and was
organizing a general conference to be held in early July. There are
journal entries from the people with whom he was meeting, other members
of the Quorum of Apostles. Look, it’s not impossible like the Book of
Mormon or Abraham being what Jo claimed them to be, but it’s
exceptionally unlikely so let’s cut that crap out. There’s plenty about
Bloody Brigham worth hating without him being responsible for Jo’s
death. He doesn’t have his nickname because your host Bryce Blankenagel
likes alliteration.

The question then remains, how does this resolve? How do you prosecute a
vigilante mob for issuing the death penalty to a person who deserved it,
when that execution was affected without the sanction of a court? Who
bears responsibility? What is the punishment for vigilantism? A more
foundational question precedes those; how do we bring a tyrant to
justice when he’s proven himself legally untouchable? How do you break
the iron grip of populism when all it does is cause harm to unwitting
victims who work tirelessly to advance it? Once a movement reaches
critical mass, how do you fracture the bad ideas which underpin it?

By virtue of my existence and millions of former Mormons since the
church began, those questions obviously remain unanswered, but they’re
dire and perfectly timeless questions to ponder… or skepticize, if you
will.

Every major biography of Joseph Smith ends here. The bodies are brought
back to Nauvoo, the assailants were all acquitted, and the concluding
chapter brings to a close the life and legacy of the inimitable Joseph
Smith by waxing poetic about how awesome the gospel is interjecting or
pithy lines about how horrible a guy he was. Yes, Jo is now dead in our
nearly 6-year historical timeline, and good riddance, fuck that guy cuz
he fucked everybody. But, I can’t help but have complicated thoughts on
this. Buuuuut, that’ll have to wait until next week because we have to
talk about all the vast and multi-faceted consequences of what happened
the day Jo and Hyrum died. For the past 2 months I’ve also been
collecting accounts from a number of people connected with all of it
because it’s important to see how those people felt and reacted to this
event. Needless to say, it’s incredibly disappointing to learn how
complicated the story really is and compare it to the 15-minute tour you
get when going through the jail, or the family home evening lesson on
the martyrdom. There are real lessons to take from all of this that make
us question society and the way we humans deal with marginalized people,
lawlessness and tyranny, oppression and persecution, policing and
warfare, law and disorder. That’s all for next week when we bury Jo and
prosecute those responsible. I hope to talk at ya next time, here on the
NMPC.

**Sources**

**Jail description**

Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett, Ukiah, California,
November 1-9, 1897

> The under sheriff and jailer lived in the jail. The jail was a two
> story stone house. The lower story and part of the upper story was
> occupied by the jailor and his family. The jail proper was in the
> north end of the building up stairs, divided off into cells. The front
> room up stairs was a kind of a family room. At the head of the stairs
> there was two doors, one entering into the family room and the other
> entering into the jail proper.

William R. Hamilton served in the Carthage Greys in 1844. His letter to
Foster Walker, describing the Smiths' murders in Carthage, was published
in Foster Walker's "The Mormons in Hancock County," *Dallas City Review*
(January 29, 1903, p.2).

> The room in which they were is about 16 x 16 feet and had one window
> in the east side, two in the front or south end, and the door opening
> from the hall, just at the top of the stairs almost directly opposite
> the east side window out of which Smith fell. There was a bedstead in
> the south­east corner of the room, under which Taylor was after the
> shooting was over. The door opened in such a manner that when forced
> open it formed a recess in the corner, so that a person there was hid
> from sight. Richard's position bought \[sic\] him into the corner.

**Franklin Worrel guarding jail**

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> While Worrell, little thinking of his tombstone, was struggling with
> his friendly assailants, as many as the narrow entry would hold had
> rushed into the open door and up the cramped little stairs. Smith and
> his brother had been that day removed from their cells and given
> comparative liberty in a large airy room on the first floor above...
> 
> This jolly, good-natured Worrell was himself murdered by Mormon
> assassins not long after. He was riding with a friend. A shot was
> heard from a thicket. "That was a rifle\!" said the friend. "Yes, and
> I 've got it," said Worrell, coolly. He fell from his horse and died.
> I have seen, as a child, his grave at Warsaw. A rude wooden
> head-board, bearing this legend, "He who is without enemies is
> unworthy of friends," — not very orthodox, but perhaps as true as most
> epitaphs.

**Thomas Sharp, Levi Williams, and company join with Carthage Greys**

<u>William Daniels,</u> *Nauvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845
issues).

> Thomas C. Sharp mounted his “big bay horse,” and made an inflammatory
> speech to the companies, characteristic of his corrupt heart. The
> following is a short extract, as near as my memory will serve me:
> 
> “FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS\! The crisis has arrived when it becomes
> our duty to rise, as freemen, and assert our rights. The law is
> insufficient for us; the governor will not enforce it; we must take it
> into our hands; we know what wrongs we suffer, and we are the best
> calculated to redress them. Now is the time to put a period to the mad
> career of the Prophet; sustained as he is by a band of fanatical
> military saints\! We have borne his usurpations until it would be
> cowardice to bear them longer\! My Fellow citizens\! Improve the
> opportunity that offers; lest the opportunity pass, and the despotic
> Prophet will never again be in your power. All things are understood,
> we must hasten to Carthage and murder the Smiths, while the governor
> is absent at Nauvoo. Beard the lions in their den. The news will reach
> Nauvoo before the governor leaves. This will so enrage the “Mormons,”
> that they will fall upon and murder Tom Ford, and we shall then be rid
> of the d—-d little governor and the ‘Mormons’ too.” (Cheers.)
> 
> After we had arrived within nearly six miles of Carthage, they made a
> halt. Col. Williams rode three or four times backwards and forwards
> from the company to the Carthage Greys. He said he would have the
> Carthage Greys come and meet them. They marched within four miles of
> Carthage, when they were met by one of the Greys, bringing a note to
> the following import:
> 
> “Now is a delightful time to murder the Smiths. The governor has gone
> to Nauvoo with all the troops. The Carthage Greys are left to guard
> the prisoners. Five of our men will be stationed at the jail; the rest
> will be upon the public square. To keep up appearances, you will
> attack the men at the jail—a sham scuffle will ensue—their guns will
> be loaded with blank cartridges—they will fire in the air.”
> 
> They were also instructed by the person bearing this dispatch, to fire
> three guns as they advanced along the fence that led from the woods to
> the jail. This was to serve as a signal to the Carthage Greys that
> they were in readiness.

Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett, Ukiah, California,
November 1-9, 1897

> We saw going on that road quite a company going hurriedly in the
> direction (of) Carthage. It was not long till we could see quite a
> number on the same road going toward Warsaw. We then went back to
> Carthage to report and what did we find. Such a sight as I hope never
> to see again.
> 
> When we saw that company going to and from Carthage my suspicions was
> arroused that all was not right.

William R. Hamilton served in the Carthage Greys in 1844. His letter to
Foster Walker, describing the Smiths' murders in Carthage, was published
in Foster Walker's "The Mormons in Hancock County," *Dallas City Review*
(January 29, 1903, p.2).

> About 11 o'clock A.M., myself and another young man were ordered by
> the captain to go on top of the court house and keep a sharp lookout
> for and see if a body of men were approaching the town from any
> direction; and, if any were seen, to immediately report to the captain
> personally, at his quarters. We had a large field glass and could
> clearly see in every direction save due north for several miles. We
> were espe­cially ordered to keep a strict outlook over the prairies
> towards Nauvoo. Nothing suspicious was discovered until about 4 P.M.
> when we saw a body of armed men in wagons and on horses approaching
> the low timber, a little north of west from the jail, and about two
> miles distant. This was at once reported to the captain, when we were
> ordered to keep a strict watch and at once report if they came through
> the timber. In about a half hour after, a body of armed men- about
> 125- came out of the woods on foot and started in a single file,
> behind an old rail fence, in the direction of the jail. They were then
> about three-fourths of a mile distant. This we at once attempted to
> report, but could not find the captain; and (not being "muz­zled," as
> soldiers of late date) told another officer, who after considerable
> delay found the captain who ordered the company to fall into line. By
> this time the mob had reached the jail and had commenced shooting. I
> there forgot all about orders to put on accoutrements and fall into
> line; but immediately started on dou­ble quick for the jail.

**Feigned attack on jail**

John S. Fullmer

> And, as might have been expected, a little after five o'clock in the
> evening, at the very time that his Excellency was insulting the
> peaceable citizens of Nauvoo, a body of about one hundred and fifty
> armed men, with painted faces, appeared before the jail, unobserved by
> the inmates, and without opposition from any quarter. The guard at the
> door, it is said, elevated their firelocks at the approach of these
> men in disguise, and, boisterously threatening them, discharged them
> over their heads.

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> The jail where the Smiths were confined is situated at the extreme
> northwestern edge of the dismal village, at the end of a long,
> ill-kept street whose middle is a dusty road and whose sides are gay
> with stramonium and dog-fennel. As the avengers came in sight of the
> mean-looking building that held their prey, the sleeping tiger that
> lurks in every human heart sprang up in theirs, and they quickened
> their pace to a run. There was no need of orders, — no possibility of
> checking them now. The guards were hustled away from the door,
> good-naturedly resisting until they were carefully disarmed.

William Daniels, *Nauvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845 issues).

> Col. Williams shouted out, “Rush in\!—there’s no danger boys—all is
> right\!”
> 
> A sham encounter ensued between them and the guard. They clinched each
> other, and the mob threw some of them upon the ground. A few guns were
> fired in the air.
> 
> A rush was made in the door, at the south part of the building. This
> let them into a hall, or entry, from which they ascended a flight of
> stairs, at the head of which, turning to the right; they reached the
> door that led into the prisoners’ room.

**Gunshots**

**Mob storms jail**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> Well after the brave guards had fired their blank carheridge on the
> mob as I was taken prisoners, the mob rushed up stairs to where the
> Smiths Taylor and Richards were enjoying themselves. Some said they
> were sipping their wine whether that is true or not I do not know. At
> any rate they were comfortably situated, and they had a right to
> suppose safely protected by the laws of the great state of Illinois.

John S. Fullmer

> The crowd by this time had encircled the building: some shoved the
> guard from their post; rushed up the flight of stairs to the
> prisoners' apartment, which for that day was in an upper open room;
> broke open the door, and began the work of death, while others fired
> in through the open windows.

**First shot through lock**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> When the false guard had made their hypocritical assault on the other
> part of the mob (I look upon them as being equally guilty as those
> that came from Warsaw.) They the attacking party rushed up stairs with
> murder in their hearts to where the accused were tryed to break open
> the door which it appears was held shut by all four of the men when
> the mob commenced firing heir loaded arms through the door.

**Second shot hits Hyrum in face**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> It appears that one of the balls in the commencement of the attac
> pased through a panel of the door and hit Hyrum in his neck which
> probably broke his neck he fell back and died, as I was informed
> instantly. When I went into the room shortly afterwards his head was
> laying against the wall on the other sid from the door.

John S. Fullmer

> The first shot, however, that was made, was through the door, before
> it was opened, at their first approach; this was the fatal ball that
> killed Hyrum. It pierced his face a little below the eye. As he fell
> he exclaimed, "I am a dead man, " These were his only and last words.
> He was afterwards, while down, pierced with a number of other balls in
> various parts of his body.

<u>William Daniels, </u>*Nauvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845
issues).

> Hyrum stood near the center of the room, in front of the door. The mob
> fired a ball through the panel of the door, which entered Hyrum’s
> head, at the left side of his nose. He fell upon his back with his
> head one or two feet from the north east corner of the room,
> exclaiming, as he fell, “I am a dead man\!” In all, four balls entered
> his body. One ball (it must have been fired through the window from
> the outside) passed through his body with such force—entering his
> back—that it completely broke to pieces a watch which he wore in his
> vest pocket.
> 
> His death was sudden and without pain. Thus fell Hyrum Smith, the
> Patriarch of the Church of God, a martyr for his holy religion\! In
> that brief moment was the Church of Jesus Christ deprived of the
> services of as good a man as ever had a name in its history.

**Taylor makes dash for window**

John S. Fullmer

> Elder Taylor was by this time also thought to have been killed, as he
> lay bleeding from many wounds.

<u>William Daniels,</u> *Nauvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845
issues).

> Elder Taylor continued parrying their guns, until they had got them
> about half the length into the room, when he found resistance vain and
> attempted to jump out of the window. Just then a ball from within
> struck him on the left thigh; hitting the bone, it glanced through to
> within half an inch of the other side. He fell on the window-sill and
> expected he would fall out, when a ball from without stuck his watch,
> which he carried in his vest pocket, and threw him back into the room.
> He was hit by two more balls; one injuring his left wrist
> considerably, and the other entering at the side of the bone, just
> below the left knee. He fell into the room, and rolled under a bed
> that stood at the right of the window, in the south-east corner of the
> room. While under the bed, he was fired at several times and was
> struck by one ball which tore the flesh on his left hip in a shocking
> manner, throwing large quantities of blood upon the wall and floor.
> These wounds proved very severe and painful, but he suffered without a
> murmur, rejoicing that he had the satisfaction to mingle his blood
> with that of the Prophets, and be with them in the last moments of
> their earthly existence. His blood, with theirs, can cry to heaven for
> vengeance on those who have shed the blood of innocence and slain the
> servants of the living God in all ages of the world. This seemed a
> source of high gratification and he endured his severe sufferings
> without a single complaint, being perfectly resigned to the providence
> of God.

**Richards hitting gun barrels with “rascal beater”**

John S. Fullmer

> Dr. Richards, with Colonel Markham's heavy walking stick, defended the
> door, knocking down, and to one side, the muzzles of the assailants'
> guns, as they fired into the room; and, strange to say,
> notwithstanding his exposed condition, he remained entirely unhurt.

**JS fires pepperbox pistol**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> It is supposed when Hyrum fell the door was partially opened by the
> attacking party, so much so at any rate that I was informed that Jo
> Smith had what was common then what was and probable is now called one
> of Steves peper boxes. It is said and there is no dout but what it is
> true that he sliped his hand through the opening of the door and hit a
> young man from Warsaw about his neck or sholder which made it
> conveinent for the young man to remain for a while in Missouri.

John S. Fullmer

> Joseph had taken position on one side of the door, and, with his left
> hand, discharged three rounds from a revolving six-shooting pocket
> pistol (which had been handed him by Elder C. H. Wheelock, but who was
> also sent away on business by them), and at each fire wounded his man;
> the other three caps did not go off.

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> Joe Smith died bravely. He stood by the jamb of the door and fired
> four shots, bringing his man down every time. He shot an Irishman
> named Wills, who was in the affair from his congenital love of a
> brawl, in the arm; Gallagher, a Southerner from the Mississippi
> Bottom, in the face; Voorhees, a half-grown hobbledehoy from Bear
> Creek, in the shoulder; and another gentleman, whose name I will not
> mention, as he is prepared to prove an alibi, and besides stands six
> feet two in his moccasins.

**Richards pinned between door and wall**

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> Richards hid himself behind the opening door, in mortal terror. He
> afterwards lied terribly about the affair, saying he stood calmly in
> the centre of the room, warding off the bullets with a consecrated
> wand.

**JS runs to window and hangs out for minutes**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> The attacing party forced the door open and commenced firing at Smith
> it is said they must have hit him an probably disabled him, as he
> stagered across the floor to the oposite side of the room where there
> was a window. It is said that there he gave the hailing sign of the
> distress of a Mason but that did him no good.

**JS falls out window and executed**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> In the room behind him was armed men, furious men, with murder in
> their hearts. Before him arround the well under the window there was a
> croud of desperate men, as he was receiving shots from behind which he
> could not stand, in despersation he leaped or rather fell out of the
> window near the well where he breathed his last. When I found him soon
> afterwards he was laying in the hall at the foot of the stairs where
> his blood had as I believe left indelible stain on the floor.

John S. Fullmer

> The Prophet, now finding himself without any means of defence, his
> brother being dead, and himself the only survivor whose life was
> sought for, attempted to make his escape through the nearest window. A
> number of balls penetrated his body, however, while making this
> attempt; and in his last moments he did not forget Him whose servant
> he was, and for whose cause he was about to lay down his life. How
> very like were his last words to the dying words of the Saviour- "My
> God, my God\! why hast thou forsaken me?" Joseph had only time to
> exclaim, " O Lord, my God\!" and fell out of the building into the
> hands of his MURDERERS.

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> Severely wounded as he was, he ran to the window, which was open to
> receive the fresh June air, and half leaped, half fell, into the jail
> yard below. With his last dying energies he gathered himself up, and
> leaned in a sitting posture against the rude stone well-curb. His
> stricken condition, his vague wandering glances, excited no pity in
> the mob thirsting for his life. They had not seen the handsome fight
> he had made in the jail; there was no appeal to the border chivalry
> (there is chivalry on the borders, as in all semi-barbarous regions).
> A squad of Missourians who were standing by the fence levelled their
> pieces at him, and, before they could see him again for the smoke they
> made, Joe Smith was dead.
> 
> Elder Richards was still contending with the assailants, at the door,
> when General Smith, seeing there was no safety in the room, and
> probably thinking it might save the lives of others if he could escape
> from the room, turned calmly from the door, dropped his pistol upon
> the floor, saying, “There, defend yourselves as well as you can.”

<u>William Daniels, </u>*Nauvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845
issues).

> He sprang into the window; but just as he was preparing to descend, he
> saw such an array of bayonets below that he caught by the window
> casing, where he hung by his hands and feet, with his head to the
> north, feet to the south, and his body swinging downwards. He hung in
> that position three or four minutes, during which time he exclaimed,
> two or three times, “O, LORD, MY GOD\!\!\!” and fell to the ground.
> While he was hanging in that position, Col. Williams hallooed, “Shoot
> him\! G-d d—n him\! Shoot the dam’d rascal\!” However, none fired at
> him.
> 
> He seemed to fall easy. He struck partly on his right shoulder and
> back, his neck and head reaching the ground a little before his feet.
> 
> He rolled instantly on his face. From this position he was taken by a
> young man, who sprang to him from the other side of the fence, who
> held a pewter fife in his hand, was barefoot and bare-headed, having
> on no coat, with his pants rolled above his knees, and shirt-sleeves
> above his elbows. He set President Smith against the south side of the
> well-curb that was situated a few feet from the jail. While doing
> this, the savage muttered aloud, “This is Old Jo; I know him. I know
> you, Old Jo. Damn you: you are the man that had my daddy shot.” The
> object he had in talking in this way, I supposed to be this: He wished
> to have President Smith and the people in general, believe he was the
> son of Governor Boggs, which would lead to the opinion that it was the
> Missourians who had come over and committed the murder. This was the
> report that they soon caused to be circulated; but this was too
> palpable an absurdity to be credited.
> 
> After President Smith had fallen, I saw Elder Willard Richards come to
> the window and look out upon the horrid scene that spread itself below
> him.
> 
> I could not help noticing the striking contrast in the countenance of
> President Smith and the horrid, demon-like appearance of his
> murderers. The former was calm and tranquil, while the mob were filled
> with excitement and agitation.
> 
> President Smith’s exit from the room had the tendency to cause those
> who were firing into the room to abandon it and rush to the outside.
> This gave an opportunity for Elder Richards to convey Elder Taylor
> into the cell, which he did, and covered him with a bed, thinking he
> might there be secure if the mob should make another rush into the
> jail. While they were in the cell, some of the mob again entered the
> room; but finding it deserted by all but Hyrum Smith, they left the
> jail.
> 
> When President Smith had been set against the curb, and began to
> recover, from the effects of the fall, Col. Williams ordered four men
> to shoot him. Accordingly, four men took an eastern direction, about
> eight feet from the curb, Col. Williams stranding partly at their
> rear, and made ready to execute the order. While they were making
> preparations, and the muskets were raised to their faces, President
> Smith’s eyes rested upon them with a calm and quiet resignation. He
> betrayed no agitated feelings and the expression upon his countenance
> seemed to betoken his inly prayer to be: “O, Father, forgive them, for
> they know not what they do.”
> 
> The fire was simultaneous. A slight cringe of the body was all the
> indication of pain that he betrayed when the balls struck him. He fell
> upon his face. One ball then entered the back part of his body. This
> is the ball that many people have supposed struck him about the time
> he was in the window. But this is a mistake. I was close by him, and I
> know he was not hit with a ball, until after he was seated by the
> well-curb.
> 
> His death was instantaneous and tranquil. He betrayed no appearance of
> pain. His noble form exhibited all its powers of manly strength and
> healthful agility, yet not a muscle seemed to move with pain, and
> there was no distortion of his features. His death was peaceful as the
> falling to sleep of an infant—no cloud of contending passion gathered
> upon his brown, and no malediction trembled on his lip. The reward of
> a righteous man seemed hovering over him, and his breath ceased with
> as much ease and gentleness, as if eternity was exerting an influence
> in his behalf and taking his spirit home to a world of “liberty, light
> and life.”

**Attempt to decapitate JS**

<u>William Daniels, </u>*<u>N</u>auvoo Neighbor* (May 7 and May 14, 1845
issues). (The account below contains several embellishments or fantasies
that are contradicted by other witnesses. For example, Daniels has
Joseph Smith surviving his fall from the second story jail and then
being shot by four men under the orders of Levi Williams. After the
murder of Smith, Daniels describes a scene in which a "ruffian" draws a
bowie knife and is ready to sever the head of Smith when suddenly a
pillar of light "bursts from the heavens upon the bloody scene" and
frightens the killers away.)

> The ruffian, of whom I have spoken, who set him against the well-curb,
> now secured a bowie knife for the purpose of severing his head from
> his body. He raised the knife and was in the attitude of striking,
> when a light, so sudden and powerful, burst from the heavens upon the
> bloody scene, (passing its vivid chain between Joseph and his
> murderers,) that they were struck with terrified awe and filled with
> consternation. This light, in its appearance and potency, baffles all
> powers of description. The arm of the ruffian, that held the knife,
> fell powerless; the muskets of the four, who fired, fell to the
> ground, and they all stood like marble statues, not having power to
> move a single limb of their bodies.
> 
> By this time most of the men had fled in great disorder. I never saw
> so frightened a set of men before. Col. Williams saw the light and was
> also badly frightened; but he did not entirely lose the use of his
> limbs or speech. Seeing the condition of these men, he hallooed to
> some who had just commenced to retreat, for God’s sake to come and
> carry off these men. They came back and carried them by the main
> strength towards the baggage wagons. They seemed as helpless as if
> they were dead.

**“The Mormons are coming\!”**

**Richards takes Taylor to jail and covers him with straw**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> You want to know what has become of Richards. He was not hurt. You
> will ask how did it happen that his comrads (were) so badly treated
> and he came off without receiving any damage whatever. It was in this
> way, as I suppose I think he told me so. The four braced themselves
> against the door to keep the mob out. He stood next to the hinges of
> the door so when the door opened it would turn back against the wall
> that divided the room that they were in from the prison room. So when
> they crowded the door open it shut him up against the wall and he
> stood there and did not move till the affair was all over, so they did
> not see him.

**John Taylor**

\[Carthage coroner\] Thomas L. Barnes, letters to Miranda Haskett,
Ukiah, California, November 1-9, 1897.

> Shall I try to describe the wounds that Taylor received and got over
> them. Well let me tell you where we found him, I cannot impress your
> mind of his appearance as he appered to us when we wer called to him
> by the jailor. We found him in a pile of straw. It appeared that a
> straw bed had been emtied in the cell where he was when we found him.
> He was very much frightened as well as severly wounded. It took strong
> persuading of the jailor as well as our positive assuriance that we
> ment him no harm but Was desirous of doing him some good. He finally
> consented to come out of his cell. When we examined him we found that
> he had been hit by four balls. One ball had hit him in his fore arm
> and pased down and lodged in the hand betwen the phalanges of his
> third and fourth fingers. Another hit on the left side of the pelvis
> cuttin through the skin and pasin leaving a superficial wound that you
> could lay your hand in. A third ball passed through his thigh lodging
> in his notus. A fourth ball hit his watch which he had in the fob in
> his pantaloons, which I suppose the Mormons have today, to show the
> precise time that their great leader was killed. The wounds had bled
> quite freely, the blood had had time to coagulate which it had done,
> and where the clothes and straw came in contact they all adhered
> together so that Mr. Taylor came out his self sought cell he was a
> pitable looking sight. We took the best care of him we could till he
> left us. He got well but never
> 
> paid us for skill or good wishes.

**Willard Richards**

**Carthage citizens immediately flee for Warsaw**

John Hay, “The Mormon Prophet’s Tragedy,” *Atlantic Monthly* (December
1869):

> The moment the work was done, the calmness of horror succeeded the
> fever of fanatical rage. The assassins hurried away from the jail, and
> took the road to Warsaw in silence and haste. They went home at a
> killing pace over the wide dusty prairie. Warsaw is eighteen miles
> from Carthage; the Smiths were killed at half past five: at a quarter
> before eight the returning crowd began to drag their weary limbs
> through the main street of Warsaw, — at such an astounding rate of
> speed had the lash of their own thoughts driven them.
> 
> The town was instantly put in such attitude of defence as its limited
> means permitted. The women and children were ferried across the river
> to a village on the Missouri shore. The men kept guard night and day
> in the hazel thickets around the town. Everybody expected sudden and
> exemplary vengeance from the Mormons.

**Willard Richards and John Taylor in Hamilton Hotel; Samuel Smith shows
up**

Times & Seasons

> 12 o'clock at night, 27th June, }
> 
> Carthage, Hamilton's Tavern. }
> 
> TO MRS. EMMA SMITH,
> 
> AND MAJ. GEN. DUNHAM, \&c-
> 
> The Governor has just arrived; says all things shall be inquired into,
> and all right measures taken.
> 
> I say to all the citizens of Nauvoo, my brethren, be still, and know
> that God reigns. Don't rush out of the city-don't rush to Carthage;
> stay at home, and be prepared for an attack from Missouri mobbers. The
> governor will render every assistance possible-has sent out orders for
> troops-Joseph and Hyrum are dead, but not by the Carthage people-the
> guards were true as I believe.
> 
> We will prepare to move the bodies as soon as possible.
> 
> The people of the county are greatly excited, and fear the Mormons
> will come out and take vengeance-I have pledged my word the Mormons
> will stay at home as soon as they can be informed, and no violence
> will be on their part, and say to my brethren in Nauvoo, in the name
> of the Lord-be still-be patient-only let such friends as choose come
> here to see the bodies- Mr. Taylor's wounds are dressed & not
> serious-I am sound.
> 
> WILLARD RICHARDS,
> 
> JOHN TAYLOR,
> 
> SAMUEL H. SMITH.

**Deming fled when attack began**

Times & Seasons

> Mr. Orson Spencer,
> 
> Dear sir:-Please deliberate on this matter; prudence may obviate
> material destruction. I was at my residence when this horrible crime
> was committed. It will be condemned by three fourths of the citizens
> of the county-be quiet or you will be attacked from Missouri.
> 
> M. R. DEMMING.

**Examination, fact finding, Bodies brought back to Nauvoo**

> <u>Mr. Jonas Hobbart Sworn:</u>
> 
> Mr. Hobbart do you live in this town.
> 
> I do.
> 
> Did you live in town on the day that Smith was killed.
> 
> I did...
> 
> Did the most of them \[mob\] seem to be armed.
> 
> Yes.
> 
> What sort of weapons had they.
> 
> Muskets.
> 
> Had they any rifels.
> 
> Yes. Rifels of a peculiar kind with \[illegible\]
> 
> Had they any knives.
> 
> I think I saw a knife in the hands of one man.
> 
> Did anybody seem to be giving and command to the mob.
> 
> I did not hear any orders given.
> 
> Was there much noise upon the ground.
> 
> Yes there was much noise.
> 
> How many guns fired together.
> 
> About thirty, as fas as I could judge,
> 
> He retired.

Times & Seasons

> The Legion in Nauvoo, was called out at 10 A. M. and addressed by
> Judge Phelps, Col. Buckmaster, of Alton, the Governors aid, and
> others, and all excitement and fury allayed and preparations were made
> to receive the bodies of the Noble Martyrs. About 3 o'clock they were
> met by a great assemblage of people east of the Temple on Mulholland
> street, under the direction of the city Marshal, followed by Samuel H.
> Smith, the brother of the deceased, Dr. Richards and Mr. Hamilton, of
> Carthage. The wagons were guarded by 8 men. The procession that
> followed in Nauvoo, was the City Council, the Lieut. General's Staff,
> the Major General and staff, the Brigadier General and staff,
> commanders and officers of the Legion and citizens generally, which
> numbered several thousands, amid the most solemn lamentations and
> wailings that ever ascended into the ears of the Lord of Hosts to be
> avenged of our enemies\!
> 
> When the procession arrived the bodies were both taken into the
> 'Nauvoo Mansion;' the scene at the Mansion cannot be described: the
> audience was addressed by Dr. Richards, Judge Phelps, Woods and Reed
> Esqs. of Iowa, and Col. Markham. It was a vast assemblage of some 8 or
> 10,000 persons, and with one united voice resolved to trust to the law
> for a remedy of such a high handed assassination, and when that failed
> to call upon God to avenge us of our wrongs\! Oh\! widows and
> orphans:-Oh\! Americans weep for the glory of freedom has departed\!

William R. Hamilton served in the Carthage Greys in 1844. His letter to
Foster Walker, describing the Smiths' murders in Carthage, was published
in Foster Walker's "The Mormons in Hancock County," *Dallas City Review*
(January 29, 1903, p.2).

> The bodies of the Smiths, after the coroner's inquest, were taken by
> my father, Artois Hamilton, to his hotel. He had boxes (not coffins)
> made out of pine boards, in which they were taken to Nauvoo the next
> day. The news of their death having been sent to Nauvoo, early the
> next morning two of their brothers, with two other men, came after
> their bodies in a wagon. The body of Joseph was placed in theirs and
> that of Hyrum in father's wagon, who with two of my brothers went with
> them.
