---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 188 - The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis pt. 3
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-188-entheogenic-origins-mormonism-working-hypothesis-pt-3/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-188-the-entheogenic-origins-of-mormonism-a-working-hypothesis-pt-3
libsyn_embed: 12602246

category: History
date: 2020-01-02 20:00:00 PST
---

Ep 188 – The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis pt.
3

On this episode, we conclude reading through our recently-published
paper in the Journal of Psychedelics Studies on psychedelics in early
Mormonism. Parts 1 and 2 established the foundation for what will be
discussed in this part 3. We examine entheogens in the early church, the
Kirtland-era, and Nauvoo-era endowment practices. Joseph Smith sending
missionaries to Texas is viewed through the psychedelic lens in
attempting to acquire a steady supply of peyote. After Smith’s death,
the sharp drop off of visionary experiences in factions of Mormonism is
particularly noteworthy. Frederick M. Smith, grandson of Joseph,
practiced use of peyote and even advocated for their use, serving as a
direct influence on the early 20<sup>th</sup>-century psychedelic
movement coming out of Harvard. Peyote and entheogen use in modern
factions of Mormon-related religions also present some interesting
ethical and legal questions. The paper is wrapped up with a conclusion
after which we bring on a guest to discuss an event coming 19 April
2020.

Find the paper here:  
<https://www.academia.edu/40786304/The_entheogenic_origins_of_Mormonism_A_working_hypothesis>  
<https://akademiai.com/doi/pdf/10.1556/2054.2019.020>

“Bicycle day” event 19 April 2020 at Salt Lake City Library followed by
a tour of Gilgal Gardens  
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/psychedelics-and-early-mormonism-what-hides-in-plain-sight-tickets-86967244369?fbclid=IwAR3hXoNtOcUwzHPCYVYJLTHDxFJaSED5pk_uXgZCgd-v3SxSda2iMDmiPAc>

Utah Psychedelic Society  
<https://www.meetup.com/Utah-Psychedelic-Society/>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

We’ve done parts one and two of reading through our recently-published
paper, The Entheogenic Origins of Mormonism: A Working Hypothesis over
the last two weeks. Part one established the background of entheogens in
magic and occult ritualism as well as the Smith family’s world view. It
also discussed herbalism in the Book of Mormon, the Word of Wisdom, and
early Mormon sacramental rituals. Part two dove into the most likely
candidate psychedelics used in early Mormon entheogen practices,
discussed the symptomology of those plant medicines, and discussed how
Smith could have come into possession of the knowledge and physical
materials to employ these various entheogens. That basis of knowledge
served as the foundation for discussing the first vision experience in
the Sacred Grove, death and rebirth symbolism in the Book of Mormon, and
the therapeutic effects of entheogens to treat trauma, depression, and
PTSD for Joseph Smith and the early Mormons.

Now, for part 3, the prestige of entheogens in Mormonism. Today we
examine entheogens in early Mormonism and what actually spurned this
project in the first place. When it comes to entheogens in Joseph
Smith’s life prior to the foundation of the church evidence is scarce
and requires a synthesis of multiple disparate documents and
suppositions based on what can be found in the dreams of Joseph Sr., the
pages of the Book of Mormon, the first vision experience, and drawn
together from the magic world view. However, in the early Kirtland-era
of Mormonism, a wealth of ecstatic and visionary experiences can be
drawn from to form a rock-solid foundation to explore psychedelics in
early Mormonism. With that in mind, we’ll discuss early Mormonism under
the leadership of Joseph Smith, the sharp, yet brief transition away
from visionary Mormonism after transition of power to Brigham Young, and
the legacy left behind. The paper ends with a discussion of another
prophet of the patrilineal line of Smith family prophets, Fred M. Smith,
prophet of the RLDS through the early 20<sup>th</sup> century, and we
touch lightly on some other Mormon sects which overtly and directly
employ entheogens to this day before reaching a short conclusion.

What do you say, listeners… are you ready to complete the spell? We’re
in for a long one today but all this hard work will pay off at the end
with a brief announcement.

**Entheogenic ordinances**

In early Mormonism, converts anticipated visions and direct face-to-face
communication with God, but only in the context of Church ordinances
administered by Joseph Smith. In 1832, Joseph Smith explained:

> *And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the
> key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of
> God.— Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is
> manifest; and without the ordinance thereof, and the authority of the
> priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the
> flesh; for without this no man can see the face of God, even the
> Father, and live. (Smith, 1833, Section 4)*

Importantly, visions and ecstasies in early Mormonism are associated
with ordinances involving the serving of bread and wine sacraments, and
anointings of bodies with anointings; while the expected visionary
Nauvoo temple endowment also features oil anointings but adds plucking
fruit from tree branches. In June, Joseph Smith (1839, pp. 17–18) told
trusted leaders:

> *God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known
> unto ::: the least Saint ::: for the day must come when no man need
> say to his neighbor, ‘Know ye the Lord; for all shall know ::: \[he\]
> will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him ::: and the
> visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will
> teach him face to face.*

It is likely that models of Biblical visions, and esoteric-minded
mentors guided Joseph Smith to ingest something crucial to his own
visionary experience.  
– Genesis 2:17 pointed to the need to eat the fruit of any tree in the
garden to retain peace, happiness, and tranquility (possibly A.
muscaria), but not the fruit of the tree of knowledge (possibly
datura).  
– Moses instructed Israel to eat manna that tasted like a wafer made
with honey (Exodus 16:31).  
– Ezekiel (3:1-3) eats a scroll that was as sweet as honey in Ezekiel
3:1, the consumption of a scroll or book tasted “as honey for
sweetness.”  
– John, in association with his vision in Revelations 10:10, eats an
entheogen that tastes sweet but in “belly \[it\] was bitter.”  
– Jesus said, “To him who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna,
and I will give him a white stone” (Revelation 2:17, see also 10:9).

In each of these cases, the ingestion of some substance tasting bitter,
sweet, or forbidden was transformative. Gastrointestinal upset is a
feature of ergot alkaloids (Schiff, 2006), Psilocybe species, and A.
muscaria mushroom ingestion (Beug, Shaw, & Cochran, 2006). Also, Smith
expounded on the Revelation of St. John, explaining that “the little
book which was eaten by John, as mentioned in the 10th chapter of
Revelation” is understood to be “an ordinance.” In this statement,
Joseph Smith informs converts that visions are associated with consuming
a substance or the application of anointing oil during Mormon ordinance
work.

What’s detailed in that portion of the paper is the dose, set, and
setting formula. Joseph Smith fits well the mold of shaman who could
program the minds of his parishioners days, months, or years ahead of
their theophany such that the dosage would find a receptive mind to
manipulate. He would tell them if they were holy and pure enough and
attended to the proper ordinances, they would experience god, the
heavens would be opened up, and they would commune with angels on high.
This programming of the people while in their sober state of mind was
the set part of the equation. The mindset must be programmed ahead of
time. Some are more receptive of this programming, others more
skeptical, but most are vulnerable to it. It should also be noted that
once a person gives in to the programming, thereby surrendering their
autonomy, the person doing the programming can facilitate all sorts of
interesting phenomena with the control they wield over the person. Of
course, this paper only touches on the entheogenic aspects of Mormonism,
but you can easily see how such power can create legions of devoted
followers willing to sacrifice everything they have to this newfound
truth. Programming humans often follows a formula and Joseph Smith
became more efficient and effective in his programming as his ministry
progressed. In many ways, that was key to his charisma. Now, to the
second aspect of setting. Set is the mindset going into the trip,
whereas setting is what is happening during the trip. Smith was also
very effective at creating a ritualism in the context of his
Christian-magic programming which would help keep participants focused
and tethered to what was going on around them, while simultaneously
exploring other mental realms. One of the first things new users of
psychedelics learn is that the experience can turn on a dime. It can go
from being an incredible and mind-expanding experience to drowning in
the depths of despair and feeling trapped in the darkest corners of
their mind by just a single variable switching or just one dark thought
entering their mind and infecting everything else. So, to combat this
possible devolution into a bad trip, the variables of setting must be
attended to. How does one create a conducive setting? Through repeatable
ritualism, songs, prayers and meditation, a moving speech by a trusted
leader punctuated by periods of quiet ambiance, warm candlelit rooms
protecting the participant from the piercing cold outside, surrounding
participants with friends and family going through the same experience,
maybe even throw specific chants and characters acting out the creation
myth everybody knows by heart and include physical contact with points
of fellowship and handshakes. Then you end the whole experience with a
quiet period of reflection where the participants can share their
experience with loved ones who also went through it. All of these
physical practices work in conjunction with the programming or mindset
of the participant to facilitate a spiritual or mystical experience.
Here’s a crucial detail, set and setting work best with a dose as well.
However, a dosage isn’t necessary to achieve this heightened state of
spiritual awareness or altered state of consciousness. That being said,
a dosage allows the other variables to not be tuned so perfectly and
still achieve the same end. This is why religious people will have
spiritual experiences or see angels without ever having eaten any
mushrooms. The set and setting variables can be tuned such that
participants can enter altered states of consciousness. Where the dosage
becomes important is the rate of success. You can have set and setting
tuned perfectly with a group of 500 people and a few of them may
experience what they consider theophany or some kind of mystical
experience that impacts them for minutes, days, or years afterward. When
you add a dosage into that perfect set and setting that rate of success
skyrockets so instead of a few out of the 500 having a profound
experience, 450 of them might have that life-altering spiritual
experience which changes their lives, alters how they see the world, and
lasts for years or decades. Or, if you add the dosage, set and setting
don’t require as much attention and there can be more variability with
still a high percentage of success. I’ll go ahead and preempt a
criticism of the paper here and briefly deal with it. Critics of the
Smith-entheogen theory may say that early visionary Mormonism was
similar to many other religions of the time when we consider various
visionary experiences. This isn’t very accurate because the meteoric
rise in number of converts of the pre-European converts is staggering
when compared with contemporary charismatic sects. Most of Smith market
competitors at the time had a few hundred converts at their peak, not
15,000 as Mormonism did right before Smith’s death. Beyond that, seldom
did these sects have such wide reports of ecstatic experiences. Speaking
in tongues or swoonings, yes, but people chasing floating white orbs,
thinking the temple was on fire, seeing angels and ancient apostles
walking through the congregation, hallucinating swaths of Native
American warriors which converted to the church while the person was
just standing on a rock in a field, multiple instances of temporary
paralysis, catatonic states that didn’t last minutes but hours or days,
people doing backflips off chairs, dilated pupils, and myriad other
symptoms are all very unique to Mormonism with respect to its
comparative size. Either the Mormon visionary experiences were
interchangeable and common with other sects of the day or they were
unique and require naturalistic explanation. With all this talk of dose,
set, and setting Joseph Smith was able to capture and utilize to his own
ends, what was the result? Let’s continue.

EARLY CONVERT VISIONS

As a budding prophet, Joseph Smith’s altered appearance was readily
apparent to observers (see Sally Heller above), but with experience, his
demeanor during visions did not so readily betray an altered state.
Early Mormon converts, as novice prophets themselves, would experience
altered states similar to those reported by Joseph Smith in his early
visions. For instance, in an 1832 shared experience Joseph Smith and his
first counselor, Sidney Rigdon alternately related what they saw in
vision while others wrote the revelation down. As was the customary
order of the priesthood at that time, Smith and Rigdon likely partook of
the sacrament at the beginning of this meeting. After this vision,
Sidney appeared pale and exhausted.

An observer reported: “Joseph sat firmly and calmly all the time in the
midst of a magnificent glory, but Sidney sat limp and pale, apparently
as limber as a rag, observing which, Joseph remarked, smilingly, ‘Sidney
is not used to it as I am’” (Dibble, 1892; for a description of this
vision, see Smith, 1835, pp. 225–231; Woodward, 2012). Joseph Smith’s
and Sidney Rigdon’s account of this vision was added to the Latter-day
Saint canon as Doctrine and Covenants, currently Section 76. This vision
entailed a physical change, elsewhere called “transfiguration,” a change
that converts would experience in their own bodies in connection with
priesthood ordinances, if they desired to see God and Heaven. According
to Smith, such a transformation of the body was needed so that “while in
the flesh, they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory”
(D\&C 76:117–118; Moses 1:11, 31). Smith taught that Mormon ordinances
and “transfiguration” were prerequisite to visionary experience.
Partaking of an entheogen would account for the physical symptoms
experienced by Sidney Rigdon and other early Mormon converts and also
account for the “transfiguration” phenomenon. Early Mormons were led to
understand that distressing bodily symptoms following sacraments and
anointing were nothing to fear but instead to eagerly anticipate. Early
Mormon converts prepared for entheogenic Church ordinances in several
ways. Many of the most ardent early Mormon converts joined Mormonism
after hearing of convert visions and after reading The Book of Mormon,
which itself has multiple allusions to entheogenic experience. These
allusions, we argue, prepared converts to experience similar entheogenic
interactions with Heaven and divine beings. Among the significant
exhortations Joseph Smith gave on this topic did not have so much to do
with personal worthiness as it did by a willingness to participate in
the ordinances and loyalty to the Church and himself. If a member
remained loyal, Smith in effect guaranteed their personal and immediate
success in accessing Heaven and angels and receiving revelation
themselves. Smith’s promise that converts would see God and experience
visions, dreams, and ecstasies would occur in receiving sacraments and
endowments. The settings where sacraments were received were initially
nature-based, followed by private homes; and later shifted to specially
constructed temples incorporating mystical symbols, including symbols
utilizing esoteric and masonic imagery. For instance, labyrinths,
gonfalons, spirals, and squares within squares adorned the Kirtland
temple. Even more mysterious, unquestionably alchemical-masonic symbols
decorated the Nauvoo temple. Further, Joseph Smith himself was the
trusted guide for ceremonies, prayers, and singing; and when necessary,
Smith managed problematic entheogenic experiences. By following this
entheogenic protocol, Joseph Smith facilitated an unprecedented number
of “on demand” religious visions and ecstasies.

**Three witness’ visions**

The type and quality of visionary experience among Mormon converts was
similar to that experienced by Joseph Smith, including the replication
of the troublesome symptomology reported by Smith. Converts receiving
visions containing doctrine and commandments that contradicted that of
Joseph Smith, however, were tightly controlled by him and non-binding on
the Church (Smith, 1835, p. 181). In July 1829, shortly after Joseph
Smith completed his work on the text of The Book of Mormon, Oliver
Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris accompanied Joseph Smith in
prayer and Cowdery, Whitmer, and Smith, and then separately Harris and
Smith, experienced visions of an angel descending from Heaven and
showing the golden plates and other artifacts associated with The Book
of Mormon, a testimony they never recanted even when ridiculed. However,
considerable controversy raged in the 19th century and today about
whether the witnesses saw the plates in a physical, sensory way (with
“natural eyes”) or in an altered, visionary state (with “spiritual
eyes”). One witness, Martin Harris, equivocated on whether the
experience was “natural” or “spiritual.” Further light was shed on the
experience by another witness, David Whitmer: “I have been asked if we
saw those things with our natural eyes. Of course, they were our natural
eyes. There is no doubt that our eyes were prepared for the sight, but
they were our natural eyes nevertheless” (Vogel, 2003). Of particular
interest to this discussion is David Whitmer’s statement that: “our eyes
were prepared for the sight.” In 3 Nephi 28 found in The Book of Mormon,
Joseph Smith~~’s~~ reveals that the physical body must change, or
“transfigure” to see spiritual things or else they would die (Moses 1;
3 Nephi 28). From Whitmer’s testimony, it appears that The Book of
Mormon witnesses were informed by Joseph Smith either directly or in the
form of The Book of Mormon passages that symptomology precedes visionary
experience. The Three Witnesses and Mormon converts alike were aware of
the biblical precedent involving Adam and Eve eating the “forbidden
fruit.” Another precedent involved the practice of receiving communion,
in which ordinary food and drink received an Apostolic blessing leading
to those present at the visionary Christian Pentecost to appear
intoxicated. The telling of Joseph Smith Sr’s. entheogenic dreams and
the entheogenic accounts in The Book of Mormon would also have provided
yet another precedent. All of these precedents, and others discussed in
this paper, placed in the immediate backdrop of their vision, provided
“emotional immunization” from fear and embarrassment secondary to the
troublesome entheogen-related physical and emotional symptomology
preceding their visionary and ecstatic experience.

**1830: New York visions**

Joseph Smith promised converts visions, but only in Mormon “ordinances”
and in the presence of Church leaders. In the first conference of the
Church held on June 9th of 1830 in Fayette, New York, organizing his
Church, Smith formalized the instructions to “oft” partake of the
sacrament. Of this meeting, Joseph Smith wrote:

> *::: we partook together of the emblems of the body and blood of our
> Lord Jesus Christ ::: Much exhortation and instruction were given; and
> the Holy Ghost was poured out upon us in a miraculous manner many of
> our number prophesied, whilst others had the Heavens opened to their
> view, and were so overcome that we had to lay them on beds, or other
> convenient places: Among the rest was Brother Newel Knight who had to
> be placed on a bed, being unable to help himself. By his own account
> of the transaction, He could not understand why we should lay him on
> the bed, as he felt no sensibility of weakness. He felt his heart
> filled with love, with glory and pleasure unspeakable, and could
> discern all that was going on in the room, when all of a sudden, a
> vision of futurity burst upon him. He saw there represented, the great
> work which through my instrumentality was yet to be accomplished. He
> saw Heaven opened and beheld the Lord Jesus Christ, seated at the
> right hand of the majesty on high, and had it made plain to his
> understanding that the time would come when he would be admitted into
> his presence to enjoy his society for ever and ever. When their bodily
> strength was restored to these brethren, they shouted, “hosannas to
> God and the lamb” and rehearsed the glorious things which they had
> seen and felt, whilst they were yet in the Spirit. (Smith, 1843, pp.
> 41–42)*

The relationship of the symptomology associated with this visionary
experience highly suggests Joseph Smith’s surreptitious use of
entheogenic material in the Mormon sacrament ordinance. Further,
symptomology associated with Mormon visionary experience likely results
in charges of medicating or doctoring the wine. Seeming to deflect this
criticism onto those making the charges, Smith warned members in August
1830 they should not “partake” of wine “except it is made new among you”
(Smith, 1835, p. 27). As he will do again in 1833, and in 1836 (see
below), Joseph seems to suggest that any wine he administers during
Mormon ordinances will be new wine, consecrated, and non-intoxicating.

**1830–1831: Kirtland, Ohio, charges of intemperance**

When Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, Ohio in 1831, converts had
experienced visionary sacraments similar to that witnessed in New York.
How did these Mormons, having not met Joseph Smith, institute an
entheogenic sacrament? Mark Staker (2009, pp. 19–26) in his “Hearken, O
Ye People” contextualizes the episode in 19th-century African American
worship practices and the enthusiasms of the Second Great Awakening.
However, there are reasons to believe that “wild enthusiasms” associated
with early Mormon visionary meetings were more than just such
reflections. For instance, a medically trained school teacher, Jesse
Moss, who knew the nature of religious enthusiasms, reported that Mormon
enthusiasms far exceeded those of the Methodists. A more likely
possibility for early Mormon wild enthusiasms is one of the four Mormon
missionaries who visited Kirtland and departed before the onset of the
Mormon excesses described below. Mormon missionaries, including
Frederick G. Williams (see above), stopped in Kirtland on their way to
Independence, Missouri. In Kirtland, they converted most of Sidney
Rigdon’s Campbellite congregation, including Isaac Morley and Peter
Kerr.

*Unusual manifestations*

In his book, Hearts Made Glad: The Charges of Intemperance Against
Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, author Lamar Petersen noted during the
early days of the Church there were “unusual spiritual manifestations”
associated with the drinking of sacramental wine, behaviors of such a
shocking nature it “impaired the image of the young Church among sober
people” (Petersen, 1975, p. 79). According to Moss (1913), a medically
trained school teacher in Kirtland, Ohio, offered testimony that
Mormons,

> *took what was called the sacrament up at the \[Isaac\] Morley house.
> They were in the habit of turning everybody out of the door when they
> partook of the bread and wine, putting blankets up at the windows,
> shutting off the sight from without ::: then \[later\] they opened the
> door and let us all come in again. \[The\] poor-house in Portage
> County, Ohio, where there were half a dozen insane and idiotic
> persons, was the best comparison of anything to the scene that night.
> And if I had had my cloak on, I would have stolen the wine and carried
> it home to see whether it was drugged or not. (p. 384)*

William S. Smith, testifying after Moss, supported the recollections of
Mr. Moss:

> *I have attended the meetings at Mr. Morley’s. ::: in the house I have
> seen young men and women seemingly unconscious, and the folks said
> they had lain so for two days and they were there on their beds, and
> nobody tried to prevent us looking at them, but we were not allowed to
> go into the room. (Ibid, p. 888)*

On another occasion, Moss concluded that Mormon sacrament meetings
“exceeded the wildest scene ever exhibited among the Methodists” and
instead “became fully satisfied the wine was medicated,” even attempting
to secure a bottle for testing but was unsuccessful (Moss, 1878).
Petersen also noted that “the catalepsy could, of course, have been
induced without the aid of wine \[but the scene was\] reminiscent of the
first conference of the Church a year earlier at Fayette, New York.”
That Moss indicated that Mormon enthusiasms exceeded that of the
Methodists and lasting 24–48 hrs, strongly support~~ing~~s this
conjecture of Smith including psychoactive substances in the sacraments.
Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, Ohio after the incidences discussed
above but in time to preside over the June 6th, 1831 Elders conference.
According to Levi Hancock (1858, p. 90) who was present as this meeting:

> *Joseph put his hands upon Harvey Whitlock and ordained him to the
> high Priesthood he \[Whitlock\] turned as black as \[Lyman Wight\] was
> white his fingers was set like Claws he went around the room and
> showed his hands and tried to speak his eyes were in the shape of Oval
> O’s. Hyrum Smith said Joseph that is not God. Joseph said do not speak
> against this. (Ibid)*

It is likely that Joseph Smith, had considerable experience with
entheogens, is not concerned with the chaos they create, and is
reluctant to attempt to intervene. However, Joseph’s brother was not
convinced:

> *I will not believe ::: unless you inquire of God and owns it. \[At
> this\] Joseph bowed his head, and in a short time got up and commanded
> Satan to leave Harvey, laying his hands upon his head at the same
> time.” ::: \[Then\] Copley, who weighed over two hundred pounds,
> somersaulted in the air and fell on his back over a bench. Wight cast
> Satan out of Copley, and Copley was calmed. The evil spirit, according
> to Hancock, was in and out of people all day and the greater part of
> the night. (Ibid)*

Taken together, the events of the 1830 and 1831 conferences strongly
suggest entheogenic influence and compares well with Joseph Smith’s
earlier entheogenic-facilitated early visions (Smith, 1830, pp. 276–267,
324–325).

*Negative publicity*

A letter to the editor of Palmyra Reflector, published in January 1831,
accused Joseph Smith of legerdemain. Since this term referred then, as
now, to “Sleight of hand; a deceptive performance which depends on
dexterity of hand; a trick performed with such art and adroitness, that
the manner or art eludes observation” (Webster, 1828), its use in this
context may reflect ongoing accusations that Joseph Smith was
manipulating the sacramental wine. Sacramental wine was not the only
possible carrier for an entheogen enhancing early Mormon sacramental
experience. We have noted the entheogenic potential of ergot-infected
rye, possibly mixed with the sacramental bread, like that which may have
induced preternatural experiences in the life of Joseph Smith’s great
grandfather Samuel Smith. As we will see in discussing Mormonism’s 1840s
Nauvoo, Illinois period, ergot-infected rye was widely used as a
medicinal remedy in Joseph Smith’s day and may also have lent itself to
more spiritual uses. Complaints about Mormon enthusiasms drew the
attention of the nation’s newspapers. For instance, in the September
1831 edition of the Vermont Gazette (Bennington, Vermont), published a
letter to the editor reporting: “Some \[Church members\] lie in trances
a day or two and visit the unknown regions in the meantime; some are
taken with a fit of terrible shaking which they say is the power of the
Holy Ghost” (Kirkham, 1959). A trance lasting 24–48 hrs is highly
suggestive of D. stramonium intoxication (Bryson, 1996, p. 673; Wiebe,
Sigurdson, & Katz, 2008). The Independent Gazetteer (Taunton,
Massachusetts) reported on January 11, 1833 that during Mormon meetings
there would be “shoutings, wailing, fallings, contortions, trances,
visions, speaking in unknown tongues and prophesying” (Morgan, n.d.).
Also, Henry Caswell (1843, p. 63) wrote of “a pretended sacrament”
associated with manifestations of power in early LDS meetings. A
pretended sacrament, although not stated explicitly, suggests drugged
wine. So vociferous were Mormon critics that local Church leaders became
alarmed and complained to Joseph Smith of similar undisciplined scenes.
Table 2 summarizes what was reported by church leaders. Although Joseph
Smith chastised Isaac Morley in whose house many of the sacrament
meetings occurred, Smith failed to acknowledge their similarity to his
own first 1820 vision of God, his 1823 visions of an angel and golden
plates, and the 1829 scrying visions while translating The Book of
Mormon. Similar problematic scenes beset meetings Smith conducted. At
Kirtland sacrament meeting in 1831, Joseph Smith suggested imminent mass
visions and promised Lyman Wight he would have a vision of Christ.
Mormon historian, Richard Bushman, explains what happened next:

> *“Wight turned stiff and white, exclaiming he had indeed viewed the
> Savior::: Joseph himself said, ‘I now see God and Jesus Christ’ :::
> Then Harvey Whitlock ::: turn as black as Lyman was white ::: his
> fingers were set like claws. He went around the room and showed his
> hands and tried to speak, his eyes were the shape of ovals “O’s” :::
> \[Then\] Leman Copley, who weighed over two hundred pounds,
> somersaulted in the air and fell on his back over a bench :::
> \[Similar behavior was manifested by\] people all day and the greater
> part of the night” (Bushman, 2005, pp. 156–157).*

These experiences, likely following the administration of the sacrament
with Joseph present, are difficult to explain absent some toxidrome, yet
easy to explain in the presence of one, and are strikingly similar to
those described in Smith’s own first vision and those that took place in
early Kirtland, possibly under the direction of Peter Kerr, a former
slave known as “Black Pete” in early Mormon literature.

*Peter Kerr*

According to Mark Staker (2009), after the missionaries left Kirtland
later in 1830, 55-year-old Peter Kerr (“Black Pete”) acted as “a
revelator” and “a chief man” to a small Mormon community in Kirtland,
Ohio, until Joseph Smith arrived in early 1831 (pp. 77, 79). Kerr was
raised by a mother whose religious tradition was the syncretic
African-Muslim religious tradition of what is now the Ivory Coast. When
enslaved, she lived along the Monongahela River in western Virginia
where Peter was likely raised in an ecstatic religious fusion of
African, Baptist, and Methodist ideas that included “interacting with
the spirit world, dancing in fire, and speaking in tongues” (p. 11). It
is therefore likely that Kerr had exposure to African folk magic,
conjure, and root medicine and knowledge of D. stramonium. According to
Catherine Yronwode, “root doctoring” mixed African magical practices
with American Indian herbal medicine. Further, “most medical herbs also
have magical uses, so urban conjures were able to take advantage of the
medical industry’s commitment to herb purity and specificity” (2002).
Among the visionary materials used by Native Americans was jimson weed
or D. stramonium (see Schultes, 1975), a substance also used in African
medicine (Hamby, 2004, pp. 39, 54). According to Staker (2009, p. 34),
Kerr was “among those brought into the Reformed Baptist movement in
early 1828” and not until late 1830, a period of nearly 3 years, that he
converted to Mormonism and “was recognized as a ‘revelator’ among them”
(Ibid, p. 119). If Kerr was solely responsible for the
entheogenic-infused enthusiasms in early Mormonism, why didn’t the same
enthusiasms appear after he joined the Reformed Baptists in 1828? It
seems more likely that one of the missionaries noted that like Joseph
Smith, Kerr was a “charismatic with a distinctive religious perspective”
(Ibid, p. 3) and concluded he was the logical choice to minister to
converts’ spiritual needs. As Staker states, “Kirtland’s religious
enthusiasm was similar in so many ways to the religious world Black Pete
knew that it is unlikely it developed as an independent experience”
(Ibid, p. 171). It would have been surprising, given Kerr’s background
and the likely promptings of at least one Mormon missionary, had he not
utilized D. stramonium in his visionary syncretism. For several months,
Kerr (like Joseph Smith would do later when he arrived in Kirtland)
introduced converts to entheogenic facilitated visions and spiritual
ecstasies bringing many into the nascent Church. Further, like Smith’s
use of datura, Kerr’s administration of this anticholinergic entheogen
was problematic, leading to an embarrassed Church and accusations of
medicated wine. In 1833, Joseph Smith blamed the enemies of the Church
for the medicated wine. In an 1833 revelation, it was advised, “in
consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts
of conspiring men in the last days ::: your sacraments ::: should be
wine, yea pure wine of the grape of the vine of your own make” (Smith,
1835, pp. 207–208).

*Prejudice and secrecy*

Joseph Smith’s surreptitious use of entheogenic material was a closely
guarded secret for obvious reasons. Although the ingestion of such
substances was not illegal in the 19th century, their use was
discouraged by withering ridicule. In a telling passage of The Book of
Mormon, Joseph psychologically prepared early converts for the ridicule
they might face and primed them to embrace it. This persecution
incorporated, into The Book of Mormon that associates an entheogenic
tree and the hostility of his neighbors, “And after they had a tasted of
the fruit, they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at
them” (Smith, 1830, p. 20). Smith even faced strong opposition from his
family. In a family gathering: Joseph Sr. began to speak of the
discovery and translation of The Book of Mormon. At this, \[his cousin\]
Jesse grew very angry, and exclaimed, “If you say another word about
that Book of Mormon, you shall not stay a minute longer in my house, and
if I can’t get you out any other way, I will hew you down with my broad
ax” (Smith, L. M., 1853, pp. 154–156). Although Jesse’s heart eventually
softened and he reconciled with his cousin, such prejudice against the
visionary, magico-religious practices of Joseph Smith Jr. required that
he make considerable efforts to conceal his selective use of entheogens.

Concealment seemed to be the next method of using entheogens in early
Mormonism. Frequent use of entheogens in this religious context can
become very unpredictable very quickly. Upon the foundation of the
church, Joseph Smith constantly spoke of personal revelation and the
early members having their own personal connection with the divine. Each
person was to receive prophecy and revelations for themselves.
Unfortunately, for a budding religious leader, this idea is
paradoxically associated with top-down control. If everybody receives
their own revelations, why do they need Joseph’s? The first conflict
resulting from personal revelation of members competing with Smiths came
in the form of Oliver Cowdery and Hiram Page receiving their own
revelations. Smith instructed Oliver Cowdery that he could preach by way
of revelation, but anything he wrote was merely words of wisdom. He also
instructed Cowdery to confront Hiram Page about the revelations he’d
written and burn those revelations and crush the seer stone Page had
used to receive the revelations. So, how does a shaman seeking to
provide spiritual inspiration and personal revelation to a growing
church keep the people looking to him as the prophet? This helps to
explain Smith’s growing hierarchical system within the church and the
expanding leadership in general. More offices were invented, the Aaronic
and Melchizedek priesthoods were divided, quorums were formed,
presidencies and councils were formed and Smith’s own revelations stated
explicitly and repeatedly that he was the only prophet who could receive
revelations for the whole church and would continue to do so until he
was removed for transgressions, at which point he’d appoint his own
successor. No longer would average members be allowed to attend the
closed-door prayer meetings wherein entheogenic sessions would create
revelation and visions of angels and deity. Those privileges were
reserved only for those who could be trusted and had somehow
demonstrated loyalty. Now, to see the face of god or witness Smith
talking with god, a person had to prove themselves willing to keep the
secrets and mysteries of the kingdom within them. We can obviously see
how this played into the increased secrecy during the Nauvoo era,
especially when polygamy as a variable is added into the mix. However,
during the Kirtland-era, the church was far more campy and fun as the
general membership had yet to undergo the collective trauma associated
with the Missouri-Mormon war of 1838. These evolving collectives of
increased secrecy were a much-needed security system to balance
entheogens and personal revelation with the control structure of the
church and keep the standard parishioners in proper check. That is,
until the greatest entheogenic event in all Mormon history, the
dedication of the Kirtland temple, known as the Mormon Pentecost.

**1833: Kirtland, Ohio School of the Prophets and the Mormon Pentecost**

In 1833, visionary endowments associated with washings, anointings, and
sacramental wine during sessions of the “School of the Prophets.” For
example, in a March 1833 meeting of high priests, “Bro Joseph :::
\[gave\] a promise that the pure in heart that were present should see a
heavenly vision ::: after which the bread and wine was distributed by
Bro Joseph after which many of the brethren saw a heavenly vision of the
savior and concourses of angels and many other things” (Roberts, 1902).
During this period, on-demand visions again suggest the administration
of an entheogen. Mormon elder Zebedee Coltrin reported Joseph Smith
confidently promising Coltrin and Oliver Cowdery, “Now brethren we will
see some visions,” after which Smith verbally guided them through a trip
to heaven, where they saw Adam and Eve seated on a golden throne that
looked like a celestial lighthouse (Anderson, D. S., 2018). Between 1833
and 1836, we have no reported visions such as seen in New York or early
Kirtland period. The embarrassment to the Church and various accusations
surrounding Mormon visionary experience necessitated a change in venue.
Smith would build a temple to house convert visions before the next
series of reports of drugged wine would emerge.

The spiritual outpouring associated with the dedication of the Kirtland
Temple in March and April of 1836 was called the Mormon Pentecost, the
equivalent to the early Christian Pentecost that was also accused of
alcohol intoxication. Visionary experiences during this period are
linked, we argue, to the administration of bread and wine sacraments and
oil anointings. Although not exhaustive, these remembrances are
pertinent to the question of entheogen-infused Mormon ordinances and
visionary experience. The Kirtland temple endowments created a sacred
space decorated with labyrinths, gonfalons, spirals, and squares within
squares (Howlett, 2014) and a prolonged ceremony that included a day of
fasting and the “reenactment of the Passion narrative and Pentecost”
(Olaiz, 2014) that included the washing of feet and anointing the head
with holy oil. In the evening, the fast was broken with a communion of
bread and wine as a “reenactment of the Last Supper” followed by a
ceremony that “mimicked the high point of Christian redemption ::: they
stayed up all night ::: a re-enactment of Gethsemane” (Ibid). In serving
the wine, Joseph Smith explained, “the wine was consecrated, and would
not make them drunk ::: they began to prophesy, pronouncing blessings
upon their friends” (Harris, 1841, p. 32). With increasing confidence in
his entheogenic sacraments, Joseph Smith enabled hundreds to received
visions during the dedication ceremonies of the Kirtland temple, but
only if willing to participate in the Mormon ordinances. Smith’s
exuberance, however, was tempered as the manifestations of
anticholinergic toxidromal symptoms led, once again, to accusations of
drugged wine. For instance, a Church member with the last name of
McWhitney complained that the wine consumed in the temple ordinances was
actually “mixed liquor” and that “the Mormon leaders intended to get the
audience under \[its\] influence” so visions experienced were believed
to be of “the Lord’s doing” (1888, p. 135). John W. Gunnison interviewed
the Church elders present at the 1836 Kirtland Pentecost and reported:
“Wine was administered ::: that had been consecrated and declared by
the Prophet to be harmless and not intoxicating. This::: produced
unheard of effects, if we may credit the witnesses of these proceedings.
Visions, tongues, trances, wallowings on the ground, shoutings, weeping,
and laughing, the outpouring of prophecies ::: these and other fantastic
things were among ‘the signs following’ at Kirtland” (Gunnison, 1852, p.
107) Even though descriptions of visions and ecstasies associated with
entheogenic sacraments and anointings at the Kirtland temple were
inspirational and stirring, problems developed almost immediately. Soon
afterward accusations of adultery beset Joseph Smith as did challenges
to his leadership, a Mormon war in Missouri, and the failure of the
Kirtland Anti-Bank society. These catastrophes would occupy Smith’s
attention and prevent him from creating an environment suitable for
entheogen administration. It would not be until ~~the~~ Smith had
established the City of Nauvoo, formed the Nauvoo Legion to protect him
and the Saints, and completed a new temple would he again promise mass
visionary experience.

This paper is understandably light on sources surrounding the Kirtland
Temple dedication for a few reasons. Primarily length. The paper as it
stands is already near 50 pages and covers a massive swath of history
from pre 1800 to current. Some stuff had to be cut and the Kirtland
Temple dedication could easily be summarized as previously read and much
of the information is quite repetitive when compared with many other
entheogen session in the early church which have been discussed
extensively in the paper up to this point. Secondly, the information is
already out there and anybody familiar with Mormon history has at least
a passing knowledge of the dedication ceremony and the phenomena
experienced there. For those unfamiliar with Mormon history, the summary
we included was plenty sufficient. And, thirdly, the information
concerning the actual set and setting of the Kirtland Temple is
enigmatic. We know washings and anointings happened and we know some
form of a passion narrative took place, however, the ceremony wasn’t
very well-documented and the record contains much more of the results
than the process. However, that isn’t an issue when we enter Nauvoo as
the process of the endowment was introduced and is relatively
well-documented from insiders and outsiders, providing a deeper well of
documentation from which to pull and make our case that these ceremonies
were crafted for the primary purpose of set and setting to harness
spiritual and mystical experiences when the dosage was added.

1842: NAUVOO TEMPLE

In 1841, Joseph Smith laid the cornerstone of a new temple in Nauvoo,
Illinois, and in May of 1842, Smith taught a lengthy Masonic-like
initiation rite to trusted leaders. The purpose of the training was to
prepare for the dedication of the temple (Smith, 1977, p. 237). Since
the temple was not completed and likely not wishing to repeat the
embarrassment associated with the open access to the Kirtland visionary
period, there were no visions during this initial endowment, and there
were none promised. However, the expected endowment planned for the
completed Nauvoo would eclipse those of the Kirtland Pentecost. Smith
explained,

> *I spent the day ::: instructing them in the principles and order of
> the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments ::: by
> which anyone is enabled to ::: come up and abide in the presence of
> the Eloheim ::: \[as\] soon as they are prepared to receive, and a
> proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of
> the Saints \[see D\&C 89:3\]; therefore let the Saints be diligent in
> building the Temple.* (Smith, 1977, p. 237)

**The Edenic tree**

The organization and context of the anticipated Nauvoo endowment provide
for the covert administration of entheogenic anointings and sacraments,
although for this endowment, the sacrament included partaking of the
fruit from the tree in the Garden of Eden. Following purifying
ceremonies of washing and oil anointing, a “new name” was given to
initiates, who were informed was connected with Christ’s promise in
Revelation 2:17 of a “white stone” (Van Dusen, 1847). Then, fruit
representing the forbidden fruit of “the tree of knowledge of good and
evil” was plucked from the tree and eaten by the initiate. The Nauvoo
endowment would avoid the problems of mass entheogenic visionary
experience by conducting initiates in small groups within the seclusion
of the temple. Receiving this sacred food also fulfilled the other
promise of Revelation 2:17 – that they would be given “to eat of the
hidden manna.” Their initiation followed both the pattern of alchemical
freemasonry with its entheogenic elixir and philosopher’s stone and the
pattern set by Joseph Smith when he ate of “hidden manna” and acquired
his “white stone.” Following this, the initiates engaged in an
interactive entheogenic journey through the fall of Adam and the
redemption of man by Jesus Christ after which they would pass through a
curtain into a beautifully decorated celestial room and the presence of
God (Buerger, 2001; Hyde, 1857). We argue that to fulfill his promise of
coming into the presence of God in the Nauvoo temple, Joseph Smith would
have offered:  
1\. An overall sense of the holy and a mindset of sacredness.  
2\. An impressive and uplifting multistoried edifice with esoteric
symbols inside and out and multiple special purpose rooms.  
3\. Trusted attendants to guide initiates through each aspect of the
ceremony, to prompt attendees should they experience confusion and
provide assurance if distress occurs, and  
4\. An entheogen that would not produce the indecorous symptoms and
outside criticisms such as the Church experienced during the visionary
Kirtland period.

After receiving the new name, an entheogenic anointing, and ingesting
Edenic fruit, converts basked in emotional and physical safety designed
to provide spiritual experiences of such consequence it would enhance
the joy of living and provide comfort during periods of struggle.

**Nauvoo Entheogen**

The procurement of an entheogen for the Nauvoo temple would not be as
easy as harvesting datura seeds found growing in the surrounding
countryside and used as ornamentals in some gardens. Because of the
Kirtland experience, datura as an entheogen would draw unwanted
attention. And gathering enough entheogenic mushrooms for the rapidly
increasing Church population, at time around 10,000, was not practical.
However, several physicians in positions of Church leadership would have
known about the medical use of ergot in obstetrics and could easily
extract ergot’s water-soluble entheogenic component. In Nauvoo, ergot
was readily availability, easy to hide, and of high potency making it an
ideal entheogen for burgeoning Church population. However, by 1842, two
important physicians in the Mormonism, Luman Walters and John C.
Bennett, became disaffected with Joseph Smith and a third, Frederick G.
Williams died. Another physician, Williard Richards, may have been able
fill these vacancies, but in 1843, the malpractice trial of doctor
William Brinks may have persuaded Joseph that an ergot-derived entheogen
could become very problematic. A year before the 1843 trial, Dr. Brinks
treated a female in labor suffering from severe pain and fever. When he
treated her with ergot to hasten delivery, her womb “lacerated or
ruptured” (Dinger, 2016, p. 85). In his defense, Dr. Brink explained, “I
gave her ergot ::: nothing but what any physician would do” (The Joseph
Smith Papers, 1842–1844). However, Dr. Samuel Bennett, a traditional
doctor, testified against Dr. Brink, stating that he “should not have
administered ergot ::: its effect on the uterus \[is\] to expel the
contents of the uterus \[or\] to produce delivery,” but ergot caused
increased intrauterine pressure, rupture, and permanent disability
(Dinger, 2016, p. 85.) The case was high drama and 3 months later,
Joseph Smith me~~e~~t with Native American leaders in what appear to be
negotiations for a safer, more effective entheogen – peyote.

PEYOTE ENTHEOGEN

During the period of Indian Removal beginning in 1830, Native Americans
living east of the Mississippi River passed through Nauvoo on their way
to their seasonal hunting grounds. Potawatomi delegations, including
members of the Fox and Sauk nations, visited Joseph Smith between April
18 and August 28 of 1843 (discussed below). The purpose of these
negotiations is not altogether clear to historians. However, as we will
see, the negotiations probably involved Joseph Smith giving valuable and
sacred property to the Potawatomi without apparent gain to Smith in
return. We suggest that Joseph Smith negotiated with nearby Native
Americans for the delivery of peyote to Nauvoo for the Nauvoo temple
endowment.

**Quest for a new entheogen**

There were several groups of Native Americans living on the American
Prairie in the early 19th century, any of which could have provided for
the transport of peyote from South Texas. Joseph Smith has had dealings
with the Prairie groups of the Potawatomi, Fox, Sauk, and Delaware
(Lenape), with Smith sending missionaries to the Mahican, Sioux, and
other Indian peoples residing in Wisconsin and Canada (Jensen, 2012;
Mahas, 2017; Walker, 1993). Further, although few Indians joined
Mormonism, there were “many among the Shawnees” who believed in Smith’s
mission (Byron, 1993).

**The Potawatomi**

The Potawatomi were an Algonquian-speaking Eastern Woodlands group
related to the Ojibway, discussed in relation to D. stramonium and A.
muscaria. However, with the Indian Removal Act of 1830, “the Potawatomi
were removed in two groups: The Prairie and Forest Bands from northern
Illinois and southern Wisconsin went to Council Bluffs in southwest
Iowa, and the Potawatomi of the Woods (Michigan and Indian bands)
relocated to eastern Kansas near Osawatomie” (Bassett, 2016). Peyote
“was used in ancient times in Mexico, spreading from the Rio Grande
Valley and taking hold on the Plains \[the American Prairie\] as early
as the 1840s” (White, 2011, p. 178). Peyotism existed among Native
American shaman and medicine people for centuries and was likely used by
Potawatomi and other Plains Indian shamans before they formally adopted
the Peyote Religion in the 1890s (Stewart, 1987, p. 93). The Potawatomi
passed through Nauvoo on their way to and from their hunting grounds in
Iowa territory (Smith & Edwards, 1972) and could have served as an early
bridge between the Indians of the Southwest (e.g., Comanche-Osage) and
Joseph Smith for the delivery of peyote to Illinois for the Nauvoo
temple. Prairie Potawatomi began actively trading peyote imported from
South Texas at least by 1870 (Schaefer, 2015) and perhaps even earlier
(Howard, 1962). In August 1841, a large group of Fox and Sauk Indians,
including 100 chiefs, visited Nauvoo in 1841 (Appanoose-Biography, n.d.)
with their leader, Chief Keokuk, forming a personal relationship with
Joseph Smith and his wife, Emma. Emma exchanged recipes for herbal
medicines with the wife of Chief Keokuk (Newell & Avery, 1994, p. 278).
During the spring and summer of 1843, three delegations of Potawatomi
traveled to Nauvoo primarily to ask Joseph Smith “for assistance and
advice in their struggles with white Americans” and in April 1844,
eleven Potawatomi Indians visited Smith again “seeking help to avoid
losing their land” (Council of Fifty, 1844–1846). Joseph Smith had a
significant number of Native American contacts during the Nauvoo period,
any of which could have provided for the delivery of peyote to Nauvoo;
we feel it was most likely with the Potawatomi. Besides this encounter,
there were additional meetings between Joseph Smith and the Potawatomi.
According to LDS Church Historian Jay Todd (1968), in June 1843,

> *Several of the Potawatomi Chiefs called to see the Nauvoo House and
> Temple ::: Nauvoo was a prominent spot for Indians and was called by
> them Quashquema ::: \[and\] Indian burial grounds abounded in the
> area.” However, not finding Joseph Smith present, the Potawatomi
> explained, “They were not free to talk, and did not wish to
> communicate their feelings until they could see the great Prophet.”
> (Ibid) They returned in July and told Smith, “We have talked with the
> Great Spirit, and ::: the Great Spirit has told us that he had raised
> up a great Prophet ::: We will now wait and hear your word.”(Ibid)
> After Smith spoke, Smith had an ox killed for them and they were given
> fresh horses for their journey home. (Ibid)*

During one of the several visits of Potawatomi to Nauvoo, Joseph
possibly gave the Potawatomi captain a significant portion of the
Egyptian papyri from which he “translated” a work of scripture said to
have been written by the hand of the Biblical Abraham (Todd, 1969).
These papyri were from a larger collection purchased by Joseph Smith in
1835 for $2,400 (Gee, 2007; Remini, 2002, p. 105). The value of these
papyri was significant since $2,400 in 1835 represents nearly $70,000
adjusted to 2019 value. It is a mystery why Smith would give away such
valuable papyri when he anticipated showing them on display for a fee,
and also anticipated translating the “Book of Joseph” from the same
collection of papyri (Larsen, 1992). The gesture is striking. Was Smith
negotiating for access to Native entheogens? Such negotiation is
suggested by the timing of these interactions with the Potawatomi, Fox,
and Sauk, beginning within weeks of the discrediting of ergot in the
Brink trial, by Smith’s inordinate “gift” to these representatives, and
by earlier exchanges of herbal information between the Smith family and
the family of the local Sauk chief Keokuk. Acquiring Native American
entheogens could have fueled a new and more profound spiritual Pentecost
in the endowment to be given in the Nauvoo temple, scheduled for
completion in 1845–1846.

**Lyman Wight**

Joseph Smith’s vision was for Mormon colonies to span the globe, with
Independence, Missouri being the center of a worldwide kingdom of God.
After the Mormon War of 1838, Smith moved the center of the kingdom to
Nauvoo, Illinois but still sought to establish colonies adjacent to
Indian Territory in areas such as California, Oregon, Minnesota, the
Great Basin, and Texas (The Joseph Smith Papers, 1842–1844, pp. 55, 170,
fns 46–47). Smith’s emissaries also negotiated for the Neueces strip
(Figure 30) in deep south Texas, an area extending from Corpus Christi
down the coast to Brownsville, then westward between the Rio Neueces and
the Rio Grande River. Lyman Wight, having experienced an entheogenic
vision of Christ as documented above, became a reliable friend of Joseph
Smith and resolutely carried out his orders, including being part of a
Mormon pinery colony in Wisconsin. Joseph Smith used such colonies,
flung out from the Church’s central hub at Nauvoo, to acquire resources
for the main body of the Church. The Mormon colony in Wisconsin, between
1841 and spring 1845, floated timber to Nauvoo amounting to “1.5 million
board feet of milled time, more than two hundred thousand shingles, and
a large number of miscellaneous logs, barn board, and timbers” (Clark,
1997–1998, p. 67). In February 1844, Lyman Wight, in conversation with
local Wisconsin Native Americans, concocted a plan to form a joint
Mormon–Indian colony in Texas. Wight wrote to Smith requesting
permission for himself and the Native Americans to travel to Texas to
initiate such a colony (Figure 31). Smith agreed, and Wight was ordered
“to take a small colony to Texas and make smooth and ready the path
for a major migration of the L.D.S. church to Texas” (Banks, 1945;
Johnson, 2006, p. 5). However, given the Mormon emphasis, since 1829, on
building settlements near Native American lands, and given that the
initial colony idea proposed by Wight was to be a Mormon–Indian colony,
it seems highly probable, if not nearly inevitable, that Woodworth would
have entered into contact with Native Americans there. Joseph Smith
aimed to establish colonies to procure resources for the body of the
central hub of the Mormon community at Nauvoo. What resource was the
planned Texas Mormon–Indian colony intended to provide? Texas was a
keystone to peyotism; peyote grew in abundance in Southwest Texas,
especially along the Texas–Mexico border and the Rio Grande River, with
an active peyote trade that only abated in 1959 (Morgan & Stewart,
1984). In this expedition, Joseph Smith may have attempted to plant a
Mormon–Indian colony in the heart of peyote country, where his colony
could harvest thousands of peyote buttons, just what the thousands of
Nauvoo saints would need if peyote was the entheogen used in the
completed Nauvoo temple. Did Joseph Smith know he was planting his
prospective colony where Mormon colonists could acquire peyote? Smith’s
evident use of entheogens, his need for them to replicate the Kirtland
Pentecost, the timing of the Texas negotiations shortly after other
potential entheogens and sources of entheogens faltered, his intention
to involve Native Americans in his scheme, his pattern of planting
colonies to supply resources from the local environment, and his choice
of the peyote environs suggest to us his intention to use his Texas
colony to supply peyote. In addition, tangible, artifactual evidence
exists indicating that Joseph Smith knew and was interested in the
peyote trade and had contacted a peyote trade network of Native
Americans through intermediaries, or directly from the anticipated Texas
Mormon colony, or both. A sacred stone found among Smith’s belongings,
which we will call “the peyote stone,” is that artifactual evidence.

**Joseph Smith’s Peyote Stone**

Among Joseph Smith’s possessions during his death was a finely tooled
sandy-colored seer stone (Figure 32), unlike any other he used for
scrying (Quinn, 1998, pp. 246–247, Figure 10). The stone is smooth in
texture with a hole through the center surrounded by eight smaller
indentations of alternating sizes where the central flower and tuffs of
the peyote button have been cored out. It is comparable to the
eight-lobed peyote button in Figure 33. The coin-like ridged circular
edge of Smith’s stone not seen on the peyote button signifies the
visionary nature of peyote. The alternating sizes of the indentations on
this stone are somewhat similar to the peyote button and are comparable
to the alternating size of the tufts in Figure 33, an eight-lobed Plains
Indian peyote pouch (Figure 34) currently displayed in the Plains Indian
Museum in Cody, Wyoming (see Hultkrantz, 1997, p. 6). The nomadic
aboriginal peoples of the American Plains included the Lipan Apache,
Tonkawa, Comanche, Kiowa, Otto, Osage, Arapaho, Sioux, and Pawnee,
bordered on the northeast by the Ojibway, Potawatomi, Sauk, and Fox.
Most of these groups were relocated, westward into Plains Indian
territory following the Indian Removal Act of 1830 and interacted with
Joseph Smith (Walker, 1993, pp. 6–7). For instance, by the 1840s, the
Potawatomi had been resettled west of Nauvoo, Illinois, within the
cultural boundaries of the Plains Indian groups, providing an
opportunity for the transmission of information about peyote to Joseph
Smith. According to Omer Steward (1974), “The Lipan Apache Indians in
the vicinity of Laredo, 1760 to 1850s, learned of the properties of
Peyote and the ritual for its use from Coahuiltecan-speaking Carrizo and
Tonkawa and in turn taught Peyotism to the Comanche and Kiowa” (p. 211),
their northern allies by 1830 (p. 215). A possible route for the spread
of peyotism toward the northeast from Texas proposed by Steward (pp.
215–216) and included in the report by R. A. Smith (1961) states,

> *“The demand for Mexican livestock, captives, and plunder increased
> after American commissioners made treaties of amity and trade with the
> Indians of the South Plains in the 1830s. The Comanche and Kiowa
> consequently stepped up their predatory raids below the Rio Grande :::
> Their deepest penetrations of Mexico put the Indians at points a
> thousand miles straight south of their home range in Kansas and
> Oklahoma ::: One can suspect the warriors might also have learned
> about and experimented with the little spineless cactus, peyote, which
> grew in the area.”*

The intricate patterning on Joseph Smith’s peyote stone in Figure 32
above may be a Native American stone gorget such as the stone in Figure
35 belonging to David Whitmer one of the three witnesses to the angel
and golden plate and used as a seer stone. Native American gorgets, worn
around the neck as signs of goodwill or an indication of status, and
Smith’s peyote stone, although of Native American origin, is not typical
of a Native American gorget. Instead, it is similar to the pre-Columbian
stone whorl from Mixtec, Mexico, shown in Figure 36. Joseph Smith’s
stone appears to be a Native American visionary peyote stone effigy.
Similarly made pre-Columbian visionary stone effigies appear to
represent the I. alvarus toad in Figures 35 and 36. Further, the Native
Americans of the Lower Pecos region of southwest Texas have a history of
ritual peyote use and the manufacture peyote effigies extending back
5,000 years (Powell, 2017; Terry et al., 2006). Peyote has tufts of
“hair” on each of its lobes and a central flower that if removed,
leave a corresponding number of depressions. Native art, such as the
peyote pouch in Figure 31 depicts peyote by the several circular
depressions or tufts, often five or eight, surrounding a central circle
or hole. The representation can further be stylized in native art by
showing the tufts or depressions as alternating in size around the
button as in Figure 32. An examination of Joseph Smith’s stone shows
precisely this same stylization. The stone consists of a central circle
surrounded by eight circular depressions arranged in an alternating
pattern of large-small-large. Joseph Smith’s peyote stone in Figure 32
above bears a striking resemblance to Figures 37–39 (frames from a video
produced by DiezyMedia in 2007). In Figure 37, the transfixed, partially
transformed shaman is holding a smooth-edged cactus, but in Figure 38,
the shaman’s eye is wide open, and reflecting a partial transformed
eight-lobed peyote button that had five lobes in Figure 37. In Figure
39, the consumed peyote button has further undergone entheogenic
transformation amidst “spiritual light” pouring from its scalloped
edges. In comparison, a reduced image of Joseph Smith’s peyote in Figure
40 favorably compares to the visionary portrayal of the Huichol peyote
button reflected in the shamans eye in Figure 41. Figure 41 shows the
shaman in spirit and endowed with new powers. While ownership of the
peyote stone transferred to his heirs after his death, how this curious
stone came to Joseph Smith is unknown. Quinn (1998, pp. 246–247)
speculated this stone, which was one of the seer stones Brigham Young
had mentioned Joseph finding at Nauvoo on the banks of the Mississippi.
However, considering the information above, it is likely a tooled stone
that was hand-tooled by a Native American familiar with peyote. Joseph
Smith owned other hand-tooled Native American stones used for
divination, as other early Mormons did, each one tooled by a Native
American (Quinn, 1998, p. 247). For instance, the Whitmer family,
followers of Joseph Smith from the 1820s, used two hand-tooled Native
American gorgets with holes bored into them as seer stones (Quinn, 1998,
Figures 11–13). Further, research conducted on these stones by Mormon
scholars aside from Quinn has uniformly identified them as tooled by
Native Americans (Ashurst-McGee, 2000, p. 165; Murphy & Baca, 2016, p.
707). The peyote stone broadly resembles Native American gorgets but has
a more intricate representation carved into it, and compares well to
Native American representation of peyote.

**Lyman Wight, Mission to Texas**

Joseph Smith’s vision was for Mormon colonies to span the globe, with
Independence, Missouri being the western hub a worldwide kingdom of God,
Jerusalem being the eastern hub. After the Mormon War of 1838, Smith
moved the center of the kingdom to Nauvoo, Illinois along with his
converts; simultaneously, he attempted to establish colonies adjacent to
Indian territory in areas such as California, Oregon, Minnesota, the
Great Basin, and Texas (The Joseph Smith Papers, 1842–1844, pp. 55, 170,
fns 46–47). The purposes of these colonies were twofold: (a) expand the
Kingdom of God until it filled the earth and (b) provide a place where,
if another Moron War were to break out, the Mormons could find
protection. How did Joseph Smith acquire a peyote stone? Given that
peyote was grown at the Texas–Mexican border, and Joseph Smith sent a
scouting-and-negotiating team to south Texas to establish a
Mormon–Indian colony on the Rio Grande, it represents one of two
possible modes by which the peyote stone traveled from the hands of a
peyotist in Texas to those of Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, Illinois. In 1844,
Smith sent a Mormon expedition to persuade Sam Huston to allot lands
then disputed by the Texans and the Mexicans. These lands included the
entire Neueces strip (Figure 30) extending from Corpus Christi down the
gulf coast to Brownsville, then westward between the Rio Neueces and the
Rio Grande Rivers encompassing the northern reaches of peyote
inhabitation. Just weeks after the Texas expedition party’s return,
Smith tasked Lyman Wight to establish a Texas colony, gave him a seer
stone, and told him he would need this stone to receive revelation
pertaining to his colonization work (Johnson, 2006, pp. 30–31). The
stone Smith gave Wight was a seer stone, but not the peyote stone he
retained until his death. With the single exception of giving Oliver
Cowdery his brown seer stone in 1829, Smith is not reported to have
given anyone else such a stone until he gave this one to Wight in April
1844. This unique action on Smith’s part and its timing are both readily
explainable if the negotiating party delivered the peyote stone to Smith
in Nauvoo. Also noteworthy is that Joseph Smith gave Lyman Wight not
just any seer stone but specifically a white stone. We have noted above
that the “white stone” has a place in Joseph Smith’s biography, biblical
interpretation, and theology. Drawing on Jesus’ promise in Revelation
2:17 (“KJV”), the young Joseph Smith had searched for a “white stone” to
use in scrying. This biblical promise of receiving a “white stone” also
included the promise of receiving “the hidden manna to eat,” a promised
gift that appears to have materialized for Smith as A. muscaria
mushrooms or datura in the family’s “sacred grove.” Since Smith’s own
experience of becoming a seer included obtaining a “white stone” used to
find entheogenic “hidden manna,” Smith’s bestowal to Wight would have
been only a halfway-boon had he stopped there. Joseph Smith’s
instructions to Lyman Wight on how to be a seer on the same pattern as
Smith would have included instructions on using “hidden manna” as an
entheogen to facilitate Wight’s experience of second sight. Some
researchers have concluded that the “manna” in Judeo-Christian scripture
was a psychoactive variously identified as a water-soluble extract of
ergot (Merkur, 2000) and the A. muscaria mushroom, also known to some as
the white stone. (Allegro, 1970; Irvin, 2009). Such a reading was known
in early Christianity judging by the number of works of art featuring
the A. muscaria and psilocybin-containing mushroom (Brown & Brown, 2016;
Merkur, 2014; Rush, 2011). Joseph Smith, if he had not learned it from a
mentor, had his own experience with entheogens, which would have led him
conclude that entheogens were used in Judeo-Christian religion. It would
be reasonable to believe that Joseph Smith would want to transmit his
entheogenic knowledge to a trusted friend who had successfully ingested
entheogens. Lyman Wight had responded well to the administration of an
entheogen in 1831 when he “turned white” and “saw the Savior” (Hancock,
1858, p. 90) and remained a loyal friend to Joseph Smith even after
Smith’s death. It seems apparent that Wight’s experience and loyalty
resulted in Smith’s gift of a white stone to locate entheogens in Texas.
Apparently successful, Wight would have visions of Smith himself, years
after the latter’s death (Blythe, 2014; see also Johnson, 2006). Wight
could easily carry 20,000 peyote buttons weighing 60 pounds to Joseph
Smith in Nauvoo.

Let’s pause again before getting into the next section. That was a long
chunk of reading but all the points were interconnected and illustrate
Smith’s seemingly endless pursuit of safe, reliable, and at-will
attainable entheogenic experiences. Smith’s legacy was cut short before
he could create the second Mormon Pentecost at the dedication of the
Nauvoo Temple. Had he not been assassinated in Carthage, American and
Mormon history would be largely different today and the wealth of
information used to form the Smith-entheogen theory may have been far
more extensive and decades longer in availability. Only speculative
fictional history and thought exercises leave us in a place where we
could formulate a timeline for Smith that would see him to old-age being
prophet for decades longer. Would he have moved the church to Texas once
the Nauvoo Charter was revoked and Lyman Wight had established a colony
there? Would he take the Mormons to the Great Basin as Brigham Young did
after Smith’s death? Would he have removed them all the way to the
Pacific Northwest Oregon territory and expanded the Mormon theocracy
into Canada? We simply can never know what Smith’s life and legacy would
be today had he been able to retain his mantle of prophet for years
after 1844. What does seem clear is the sharp drop-off of visionary
Mormonism in his absence, which may be the strongest piece of
inferential evidence available to the Smith-entheogen theory. The
visionary and ecstatic era of Mormonism requires naturalistic
explanation. The almost complete absence of those same visions and
ecstasies after his death equally require naturalistic explanation.
Psychedelics used in entheogenic context explain both of these
remarkable phenomena. I’ve said this many times on the podcast and I
believe it bears repeating. Historians simply don’t have access to the
divine lest they drift into the territory of theology. A person can
posit that the visionary trances experienced by Smith and many early
Mormons are due to some endowment or influence of an almighty force, but
that can never be demonstrated or repeated, therefore it cannot be
reasonably postulated as an operating factor within any historical
model. God gave Joseph Smith revelations isn’t history. Joseph Smith
claimed to receive revelations from god is history. The early Mormons
enjoyed the love and blessings of god because they were so spiritually
inclined and led by the one true prophet of this dispensation isn’t
history. The early Mormons were the recipients of psychedelic plant
medicines administered through sacramental and anointing rituals in an
entheogenic context which resulted in ecstatic and mystical phenomena is
history. At the end of the day, all the Smith-entheogen theory boils
down to is a proposition; is it reasonable to assume, and therefore
historically plausible, that psychedelics were used in early Mormonism
to facilitate visionary experiences replete throughout contemporary
documentation? If the answer to that question is yes, then psychedelics
require a seat at the table as much as any other model of early Mormon
history postulated by any other historian. Let’s wrap this up with an
exploration of entheogens in Mormonism after Smith’s death.

THE END OF VISIONARY MORMONISM

The end of visionary and ecstatic Mormon can be causally associated with
the death of Joseph Smith. Only a few of the many Mormon schisms that
successors organized proved to be visionary. Those are visionary
Mormon-Native American syncretisms that use peyote as an entheogen. Only
one of Smith’s descendants is reported to have used entheogens to
facilitate spiritual growth and wished to introduce it as a general form
of religious worship.

**Death of Joseph Smith**

Friction between Mormonism and their Missouri neighbors increased to the
breaking point, and war broke out with Joseph Smith barely escaping with
his life and the body of Mormons moving north in Illinois (Baugh, 2000).
After fleeing Missouri, Smith established a new city that he called
Nauvoo, the Beautiful along the eastern banks of the Mississippi River.
Anticipating continued contention with non-Mormons, Smith formed a
theocracy with political and military branches (Hansen, 1960, 1967).
After Mormons deserters published an inflammatory first issue of the
Nauvoo Expositor, Joseph Smith as the mayor of Nauvoo and general of the
Nauvoo Legion ordered the destruction of the press.

**Schismatic Mormonism**

Within a century following the death of Joseph Smith, Mormonism
splintered into over 200 schisms that collectively boast worldwide
membership of over 16 million. The largest Mormon denominations are The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The Community of Christ
(formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints),
and groups collectively called Fundamentalist Mormons who still practice
polygamy (Shields, 1982). The leaders of these schisms each claim to be
the legitimate heir to Joseph Smith, and prophet leader of their only
true Church. Each schism attempts to maintain Mormonism as it was under
Joseph Smith’s leadership, including teaching his doctrine, believing
his revelations, build temples, and performing his ordinances. For
instance, in 1846, Brigham Young conducted temple endowments in the
Nauvoo temple, as he understood Joseph Smith intended, including oil
anointing, and raisins plucked from an Edenic tree (Buerger, 2001).
However, to the disappointment of many, no religious visions or
spiritual ecstasies were reported.

**Return of the Egyptian Papyri**

In winter 1846 as Brigham Young led the first contingent of Mormon’s
westward out of Illinois and across the Mississippi River and into Iowa
where they camped. While there, a Potawatomi Captain inexplicably
presented Brigham Young with “two sheets of the Book of Abraham
\[papyri\]; also, a letter from their ‘Father’ Joseph Smith, dated 1843,
and a map of their land by W. W. Phelps” (Todd, 1968, p. 40). Had Joseph
Smith arranged for the Potawatomi captain to deliver peyote to Nauvoo
and exchanged a peyote stone for Egyptian papyri as a token of their
bargain, then the return of the papyri following Smith death solves the
mystery.

**Successors’ negative views of visionary symptomology**

Joseph Smith told early converts to expect somatology associated
religious visions and spiritual ecstasies. To prepare converts for the
entheogen-facilitated spiritual manifestations and associated
symptomology, Joseph Smith (1839, pp. 18–19) explained:

> *It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the
> understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a
> man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile
> though it may not have half as much visual effect upon his body; for
> as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is
> calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the
> pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a
> Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the
> seed of Abraham. That man that has none of the blood of Abraham
> (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost.*

Therefore, stark was the difference between the many visions reported in
early Mormonism and lack of similar reported after Joseph Smith’s death,
which distressed members inquired of their leaders. Mormon Apostle
George A. Smith responded to these concerns in an 1867 discourse in Salt
Lake City:

> *The question has often arisen among us, why it is that we do not see
> more angels, have more visions, \[and\] do not see greater and more
> manifestations of power? (Smith, 1867, p. 10)*

What followed is revealing. Apostle Smith recalled that in 1836, a
filled Kirtland temple with over four hundred men of the priesthood,
most of whom witnessed,

> *great manifestations of power, such as speaking in tongues, seeing
> visions, administration of angels. Many individuals bore testimony
> that they saw angels, and David Whitmer bore testimony that, he saw
> three angels passing up the south aisle, and there came a shock on the
> house like the sound of a mighty rushing wind, and almost every man in
> the house arose, and hundreds of them were speaking in tongues,
> prophesying or declaring visions, almost with one voice. (Ibid)*

Then, Apostle Smith diminished the value of these experiences when he
noted that,

> *A number of them who manifested the greatest gifts, and had the
> greatest manifestations have fallen out by the way side, you look
> around among us and they are not here ::: . But where you find men who
> have turned away, and have got terribly afflicted with self-conceit,
> you will find those, who, on that occasion and similar occasions,
> received great and powerful manifestations, and when the spirit came
> on them it seemed to distort the countenance, and caused them to make
> tremendous efforts in some instances. (Ibid)*

Reflected in George A.’s next remarks is the post-Joseph Smith Mormon
attitude regarding public religious manifestations and spiritual
ecstasies. Speaking favorably of non-visionary post-Smith “revelation”
by inspiration, George A. spoke of faithful converts,

> *who received the knowledge of the things of God by the power of his
> spirit, and sought not after signs and wonders, and when the spirit
> rested upon them seemed to produce no visible demonstration. (Ibid)*

George A. Smith knew there was a significant change in convert’s
visionary and ecstatic experience following the death of Joseph Smith.
Direct and personal experience with angels and God gave way to
revelation described as inspirational manifestations. As discussed
above, in every case involving entheogen use in early Mormonism, a
change in mental and emotional state was apparent to non-intoxicated
observers both inside and outside the Church. That cessation of
observable symptomology associated with post-Joseph Smith spiritual
experience and the lack of visions and ecstasies reported by his
successors provide persuasive evidence that Joseph Smith made use of
entheogens. Even more noticeable are the many contemporary reports of
entheogen-facilitated visions and ecstasies echoing those of Joseph
Smith and early of Mormon converts. The cessation of convert and
leadership visionary and ecstatic experience following the death of
Joseph Smith may partly inform the observation of Sterling Professor of
Humanities at Yale University, Harold Bloom (2007) when he observed, “I
am puzzled by the current Salt Lake City hierarchy. If there is any
spiritual continuity between \[Joseph\] Smith and Gordon B. Hinckley \[a
Prophet and Utah successor to Joseph Smith\], I am unable to see it. No
disrespect is intended by that observation.” If “placebo sacraments”
replaced those infused with entheogens in early Mormonism, the spiritual
discontinuity between Joseph Smith and his successors noted by Hard
Bloom is readily accounted for and easily explainable.

ENTHEOGENIC SUCCESSORS

More than any other American religion, Mormonism has spawned several
forays into entheogenic sacraments. We start with Joseph Smith’s
grandson, Frederick ~~G~~M. Smith.

**Frederick M. Smith**

The evidence reviewed above that Joseph Smith kept a Native American
peyote stone as a sacred possession, attempted to locate a colony in
peyote country, and intended to offer his followers peyote in the temple
to facilitate their experience of God puts us in a better position to
now to address a question we raised early in the paper. Like his
grandfather Joseph Smith, Frederick M. Smith (1875–1946) manifested a
precocious openness to entheogens, particularly peyote. As shown by
Emma’s letters and oral transmission of information to her children
and grandchildren about the entheogenic-potent herbs jimson (datura) and
lobelia, information about entheogens was passed on from Joseph Smith
Jr’s generation not through his Church but within his family. Joseph’s
family was also heirs to his hand-tooled seer stone in a peyote button.
After his death, the stone remained in possession of his widow Emma, who
passed it on to her second husband, Lewis Bidamon. The stone eventually
came into the possession of Lewis’s illegitimate son Charles Bidamon.
Frederick ~~G~~M. Smith, born in 1874, is likely to have seen the stone
as a child and would have known it by reputation at the least. As the
stone passed beyond the Smith family and eventually to collector Wilford
C. Wood, any oral lore passed along with the stone within the Smith
family failed to be transmitted with it further, and the stone was known
only as one of Joseph Smith’s seer stones, with no other information
about its provenance or significance. However, just because the stone’s
representational significance was unknown to those who later sold and
bought, it does not mean this significance was unknown to the Smith
family. Joseph Smith family’s cross-generational legacy of a peyote
stone and oral traditions about entheogenic herbs, and possibly about
the stone itself, makes it unsurprising that Frederick M. Smith would
have been exceptionally open to using entheogens, including peyote.
Joseph Smith’s revelations were the “bed-rock” of Mormonism and
Frederick “wanted to understand the \[revelatory\] process,” a subject
he explored in The Higher Powers of Man (1918), with an entire chapter
devoted “to the wonders of peyote” (Tommasini, 1997, p. 83). In this
work, Frederick discussed the usefulness of peyote as an aid to
spiritual development, reverberating his previous entheogenic
experiences, experiences “he did not dare to chronicle” (Tommasini,
1997, p. 83). Frederick wrote, “Ecstasy has played an important role in
human affairs, particularly the religious, and it is scarcely stating
the matter fairly to hold that it is always associated with the
pathological. Ecstasy is the central experience of religious experience
usually associated with mysticism” (Smith, 1918). Frederick learned “the
rituals and powers of peyote” while pursuing his PhD in psychology. When
Frederick visited Texas on vacation, “he observed Native American
Indians who ate \[peyote\] ::: \[and\] Catholic converts, who \[drank it
as a tea\] for communion” (Tommasini, 1997, p. 83). Frederick believed
the use of peyote in a spiritual setting was not a violation either of
the spirit or the letter of his grandfather, Joseph Smith’s 1833 dietary
revelation known as the “word of wisdom” (Smith, 1833, pp. 207–208).
“Frederick did not believe that peyote was technically, a drug. To him
it was a natural substance, an ancient means to tap one’s inner power
derived from hallucinogenic cactus \[as Frederick put it, is\] ‘neither
injurious nor habit-forming’” (Tommasini, 1997, p. 83). Frederick
introduced peyote to Virgil Tomson (1896– 1989), an American composer
who played a significant role in creating an “American Sound” in
classical music. Smith gave Virgil “five bumpy little buttons less than
an inch across and hard as wood and suggested that he chew them up
before he went to bed” (Ibid). Virgil described his experience: “The
effect, full visions complete in color and texture as a stage set, began
slowly to appear before my closed or open eyes. Then came more rapidly
::: Each one, moreover, had a meaning \[and\] could have been published
with a title; and their symbolisms or subjects::: constituted a view of
life not only picturesque and vast, but just as clearly all mine and all
true” (Tommasini, 1997, p. 84). Virgil introduced S. Foster Damon, an
academic and poet specializing in the mystic William ~~Black~~Blake, and
“who reported on the similarity of Blake’s art to Peyote visions”
(Piper, 2016). Frederick, Virgil, Damon, and others belonged to a
“Harvard psychedelic circle” who were engaged in the exploration of
peyote spirituality (Piper, 2016). Damon was profoundly affected by his
peyote experiences and subsequently penned articles titled, The Evidence
for Literal Transmutation and Symbols of Alchemy (Ibid). In Symbols of
Alchemy, Damon (1922) argues that “To the alchemists, ‘Gold,’ the most
perfect in the metalline world, stood for Man, the perfect product of
creation” and to “‘to make gold,’ actually meant to make (or
materialize) a human being” (p. 79). Damon also discussed “The Elixir of
Life” stating it was called such “because of the way it \[by a chemical
process\] manifested itself ::: since by its means, the afterworld could
be reached.” Further, “each alchemist used a new term \[for the Elixir\]
every time he could think of one” (p. 81). Damon argued that Alchemists
kept their secret by means of symbols and “frankly confessed that they
deliberately confused their symbols” because it “was a matter of life
and death for these men to keep their secret: one hint, and they with
all their colleagues would have been massacred” (Ibid, 79, emphasis
added). We have argued that Joseph Smith’s intentionally obscured
entheogen for the same reason. Frederick Smith represents a rare
confluence of many factors discussed in this paper. He was the
patrilineal grandson of Joseph Smith, the prophet of the Reorganized
Mormon church (1915–1946), a classically trained psychologist, and his
doctoral thesis extensively discussed and advocated for using the
entheogen peyote in religious settings. And if Frederick Smith’s
engagement with psychedelics and the “Harvard psychedelic circle”
(Piper, 2016) reverberated in family traditions of his grandfather
Joseph Smith’s engagement with psychedelics, then Joseph Smith may
himself have exerted an indirect but positive influence on the unfolding
of psychedelic culture in the United States. One might think such was
the case since the next “Harvard psychedelic circle” included Timothy
Leary, Ram Dass, Huston Smith, and Andrew Weil who played a significant
role ushering in a “New Age” for America (Lattin, 2011). Contemporary
scripture in the Community of Christ establishes Joseph Smith’s
original, historic goal of universal prophethood as one of the faith’s
immediate priorities. Revelations issued by Community of Christ prophet
presidents Grant McMurray and Stephen Veazey and accepted by the Church
into its Doctrine and Covenants (Community of Christ, 2007) who proclaim
that participants in the Community of Christ are called “to be a
prophetic people” and to “live prophetically” (Section 162:2c, 8c;
164:1). With its heritage of two early prophets who used and promoted
entheogens as a potent means for living out this age-old vision, the
Community of Christ is perhaps uniquely positioned among restorationist
and liberal Christian denominations to leverage entheogens to become “a
prophetic people” as Joseph Smith envisioned.

**Oto Church of the First-Born and the Native American Church (NAC)**

The Mormon-Indian-peyote syncretisms began in 1914 with the
incorporation the Oto Church of the First-Born, the predecessor to the
Native American Church (Rigal-Cellard, 1995). According to Weston La
Barre (1938), early Plains Indian peyote “rites diffuse\[ed\] from the
Kiowa-Comanche ... \[to\] the Oto Church of the First-born ::: and its
successor, the Native American Church.” In their Churches, the Oto met
to see the “faces of their dead relatives” and the Osage met “to see the
face of Jesus” (Ibid). The Oto Church of the First-born was found by
Jonathan Koshiway (La Barre, 1938), the first Native American syncretism
to seek legal incorporation. Koshiway was a missionary for the
Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saint, now the
Community of Christ and later “met with Kiowa and Arapaho to found the
Native American Church” (Rigal-Cellard, 2004). The Oto Church of the
Firstborn likely represents Koshiway familiarity with the Mormon concept
of the “Church of the Firstborn,” and its visionary nature as described
in Mormon scripture. Joseph Smith (1844) explained that Mormon’s who
were faithful and obtained the ordinances,

> *have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of
> heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the
> general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the
> communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of
> the new covenant” (pp. 101–102; also see Collier, 1977).*

Probably, Koshiway viewed peyote as the key to commune with the heavenly
Church described by Joseph Smith.

**The Peyote Way Church of God**

The next Mormon-Native American-peyote syncretism, The Peyote Way Church
of God (PWCG), was founded by Reverend Immanuel Pardeahtan Trujillo in
1979 and is based in Willcox, Arizona (Rigal-Cellard, 2004). In 1948,
before founding the PWCG, Rev. Trujillo (50% San Carlos Apache) joined
the NAC. However, Trujillo became dissatisfied with the NAC because it
limits membership and peyote sacrament to “genuine Natives” who can
prove at least 25% American Indian ancestry, and their spouses
regardless of race. Trujillo’s objection arose when, “William Russell,
Apache Roadman for the NAC. Rev. Russell and Rev. Eugene Yoakum. ..
\[taught\] Trujillo about the Spirit Walk and instilled in him the
non-racist nature of the Holy Sacrament Peyote” (Peyote Way Church of
God, n.d.). Preferring not to limit peyote sacraments to Native
Americans, Trujillo left the NAC in 1966. The PWCG “strictly adheres to
the creeds of the L.D.S. Church” (Rigal-Cellard, 2004). According to
Rigal-Cellard, “Anne Zapf, the President of the Church from 1985 to
1993, became a Mormon while in college and helped Trujillo settle the
Church and ::: a fairly high number of Natives of the region belong to
the L.D.S. Church” (Ibid). Shields (1982, p. 221) goes further stating
the PWCG descends from Joseph Smith’s Mormonism. The PWCG believes that
Joseph Smith’s “Word of Wisdom” (D\&C 89) provides for their peyote
sacrament (Murphy, 1994a, 1994b). Furthermore, the bylaws of the PWCG
published in 1981 permit it to: “To grow, obtain, steward, protect and
defend the Holy Psychedelic Sacrament of Peyote and its religious use;
and to regulate the distribution of this Holy Psychedelic Sacrament to
other members of this and other churches that use a psychedelic as their
Holy Sacrament.” In its mission to offer peyote sacraments to non-Native
Americans, the PWCG ran into legal difficulties. In 1991, one leader,
Brother Bill Stites, was arrested by federal officers for felony
possession of peyote found in his car (Rigal-Cellard, 2004). The legal
challenges to the NAC offering peyote sacraments to non-Native Americans
faced by the PWCG would bleed into the legal woes of the next
Mormon-Native American-peyote syncretism, the Oklevueha NAC (ONAC).

**James Warren “Flaming Eagle” Mooney**

James Warren Mooney, a former Mormon, is the founder of the
controversial ONAC that openly provides peyote ceremonies for people
without Native American descent. Mooney reports being told in 1988 by
Oklevueha Chief and Medicine Woman Little Dove he was a descendant of
both Osceola, the Seminole Indian chief, and the famed ethnologist James
Mooney (1861–1921); these genealogical attributions would become a
center of controversy. James Warren Mooney, then a Mormon and successful
businessman, was given to understand that he was called to carry Native
American plant medicine to non-Indians, the particulars of which he was
instructed to decide for himself (L. B. Buford, personal communication,
May 6, 2019). In 1994, after a lengthy period of training with various
Native American medicine people including Guadalupe Rio de la Cruz, a
Huichol Medicine woman, Mooney, conducted NAC peyote sacrament
ceremonies without regard to race. In 1997, Mooney founded the ONAC and
in 2000 was excommunicated from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints. In 2001, Mooney’s home and new Church was raided by local law
enforcement officials. In these places of worship, according to Mooney,
they seized peyote amounting to over thirty pounds, representing about
10,000 dried peyote buttons. Mooney and his wife, arraigned on charges
of “a dozen counts of drug trafficking and one count of racketeering,”
faced life in prison (Gehrke, 2001). The State of Utah contended that
Mooney was not covered by the Federal Religious Peyote Exemption (21
C.F.R. § 1307.3) because he was not of Native American descent, nor a
member of a federally recognized tribe. The trial resulted in James’ and
his wife Linda’s conviction on multiple felony counts related to what
was alleged to be a criminal enterprise based on distributing peyote
within the context of their religious services. In 2003, the Mooney’s
appealed the trial court’s decision to the Utah Supreme Court who:
“Reverse\[d\] the trial court’s decision ::: the federal regulation
does not restrict the exemption to members of federally recognized
tribes. We therefore rule that the exemption is available to all members
of the Native American Church” (State of Utah, 2004). Following this
decision, the Utah District Attorney attempted to convince the federal
government to prosecute James and Linda on similar charges related to
peyote sacrament. The question in the government’s case against James
Mooney was his claimed Native American descent. Unexpectedly,
government-certified genetic testing revealed Mooney’s ethnicity: 58%
European, 35% Native American, and 9% Sub-Saharan African. (Certificate
of Ancestry, 2005). After 6 months of investigation by United States
Federal Attorneys and Federal Investigators, the case against James
Mooney resolved when the Mooneys entered into a plea agreement. In
conversation with one of the authors, Mooney believes that ONAC
worldwide membership top well over 10,000.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have reviewed the historical and psychopharmacological
data that Joseph Smith employed entheogens in religious ordinances,
facilitating many early Mormon visions and ecstasies. Gaining
proficiency over time, Smith dealt with troublesome entheogen-related
symptomology and “difficult trips” by encoding them, along with
entheogenic visions and ecstasies, in his published teachings and
revelations. The reproduction of biblical prophetic and apostolic
experience and the antidepressant effects of entheogens in early
Mormonism contributes to an understanding of Joseph Smith’s charisma and
the spectacular rise of his Church – it continues to do so if only in
story. If organized religion is to remain relevant in our post-modern,
Internet-informed, and ecopsychologically sensitive world, it must come
to grips with what cognitive and neuroscience have to say about
religious experience as natural phenomena and entheogens as
near-universal facilitators of that experience.

Much more can be, has been, and will be, said about entheogens in
Mormonism. A tacit implication of the final sections discussing
religions connected to Mormonism using peyote and the conclusion is that
factions of Mormonism may have a legal case to legalize peyote or other
entheogens for religious sacramental use. Obviously, saying such in an
academic paper can raise plenty of concerns and was therefore only
implied, but the point remains. If Joseph Smith used entheogens in his
religious practices prior to those plant medicines being prohibited, a
legal case could be made outside of Native American religions to use
entheogens within a religious context. Even more obvious, however, is
the cultural and religious prohibition on anything of this sort in the
vast majority of Mormon factions. A cultural and societal shift must
occur before such propositions may ever begin to be entertained. It is,
in my opinion, a fascinating aspect of this paper and an interesting
thought-exercise at the very least.

That’s it. That’s our paper, recently published in a special issue of
the Journal of Psychedelics Studies. This was read with permission from
the journal and other authors of the paper and you’ll find a link to the
full paper with images, tables, and author bios in the show notes as has
been the case for all three of these episodes. I know this has been a
long episode, but we have one more thing to help us through the
afterglow of this journey we’ve taken together. Let’s debrief.

I’ve been researching and presenting the topic of psychedelics in
Mormonism for a bit over 3 years now. In that time, I’ve been met with a
number of people who are interested in the topic and ask something along
the lines of, “have you ever done your own personal research in
psychedelics?” or “so where can I get some?” My answer to these
questions is always that I’m merely a researcher who calls things like I
see them. I can’t answer those questions, but what I can recommend you
do is read. Read a lot because the resources are plentiful. Once you’ve
read a lot and done your own research on psychedelics, find a local
foraging or psychedelics society because there are hundreds across the
nation. Information and community are the keys to successfully exploring
altered states of consciousness. Joining us on the line today is one of
the founders of the meetup group Utah Psychedelic Society to tell us a
bit about the organization and promote an upcoming event on bicycle day
2020. Logan, thanks so much for joining us today.

First off, tell us a bit about Utah Psychedelic Society.

What can first-time attendees expect when they finally decide to pull
the trigger and come to an event?

Tell us what’s going on this upcoming bicycle day, April
19<sup>th</sup>, 2020.

Where can people find information about the event?

Where can listeners learn more about Utah Psychedelic Society?

Thanks so much for joining us.
