---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 202 - Nauvoo Expositor: Destruction
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-202-nauvoo-expositor-destruction/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-202-nauvoo-expositor-destruction
category: History
date: 2020-04-10 05:22:57 +0000
---

Ep 202 – Nauvoo Expositor: Destruction

On this episode, the Nauvoo City Council spends all day 10 June 1844
deliberating about how to deal with the Nauvoo Expositor. The push
through the council a new ordinance concerning libelous publications
then spend the rest of the day discussing whether or not the Expositor
should be declared a “public nuisance,” and therefore necessary to
remove. They side with Joseph Smith in his calls for vote in favor and
the marshal, John P. Greene, obeys the Mayor’s orders and destroys the
printing press and ransack the office. The Nauvoo Legion were also
called to assist the marshal and martial law is declared by the prophet,
priest, king, lieutenant-general, and presidential candidate, Joseph
Smith.

Links:

City Council minutes  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#full-transcript>

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.bancamp.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

It’s June 9<sup>th</sup>, 1844. The Nauvoo Expositor had been published,
the public was in an outrage about the salacious revelations contained
therein. The Nauvoo leadership were in constant meetings to determine
how to handle the Nauvoo Expositor. The first edition was a massive
threat but the danger of what it may publish in subsequent editions
loomed as the most dangerous threat to Jo and his clandestine church.

The Expositor took aim, not only at polygamy, but at the incredible
amount of power held by Nauvoo elites. The editor, Sylvester Emmons,
advocated openly for a blanket repeal of the Nauvoo Charter, which would
completely upend the Mormon settlement and thereby moot all the powers
granted by the city government to the Mormon leadership. It was a
tenuous theocratic empire and Jo was the criminal kingpin atop the shaky
lattice.

Add in to the confusion, most of Jo’s closest and trusted allies were
all across the nation to electioneer and help posture Joseph in a
favorable position for the coming 1844 Presidential election. The usual
circle of elite bodyguards who’d sworn oaths to protect the prophet at
the cost of their own lives was running as a skeleton crew. The High
Council couldn’t form a quorum to meet. The Council of Fifty had less
than half of its members in the boundaries of the city. Joseph had never
been so vulnerable. He attempted to handle the issue with the City
Council.

The meeting of the city council on June 8<sup>th</sup> contained
discussion about the Nauvoo Expositor, it’s printers and editors, Joseph
H. Jackson and counterfeit coins, alcohol laws, and numerous other
topics. The best option Jo could come up with to deal with the Expositor
was to introduce a new ordinance concerning libelous or slanderous
publications. According to the minutes, taken by Hosea Stout, “Mayor
\[Joseph Smith\] Suggested that council pass an ordinance to prevent
misrepresentations & Libellous publicati\[o\]n, and wanted a law passed
to p\[r\]event all, conspiracy against the peace of the city.”

What does he mean when he says conspiracy against the peace of the city?
That was Jo being mad that people wanted to force him to abide by laws.
Just like every tyrant who flaunts the system of government and laws
which oppose their meteoric rise, Jo’s greatest fear was governor Thomas
Ford bringing the Illinois militia into Nauvoo and affecting an arrest.
Jo was averse to bloodshed but he was quite heavy-handed in his rhetoric
concerning how the Mormons with their Nauvoo Legion would respond to a
militia attempting to enter the city. But, Jo’s actions rarely matched
his words and he didn’t want a war.

With that in mind, though, he wasn’t wrong. The peace of the city was
contingent on him continuing to defy the law. As long as he could act as
a king, everything would continue unopposed and the peace of Nauvoo
would remain… sort of. It was peaceful for those who were privileged
with leadership ranks. For the thousands of regular Mormons life was
hard and demanding.

As soon as Jo was held to the law, he would suffer the death penalty and
multiple charges of riot, inciting violence, adultery, perjury, larceny,
conspiracy, and half a dozen other serious criminal charges. Could his
rhetoric solidify in the minds of his followers that it was all
religious persecution and mobocracy? It wouldn’t be until after his
death for us to find that it had worked, but in this second week of June
1844 it wasn’t so certain. Too many issues were dancing on a knife’s
edge right now and Jo felt like actions to suppress the Nauvoo Expositor
were the most prudent decisions to be made sooner rather than later.

To make matters worse, Jo had been dealing with constant personal
illness for the entire winter and spring. It’s unknown exactly what his
illness was but replete throughout his 1844 journal entries we find many
passages about his ill health and his lungs failing. Even when he took
the stand at during the April 1844 General Conference to deliver his
famed King Follett Discourse he prefaced it by telling the members to
pray to the lord to give him strength in his lungs.

The day after Jo told the City Council to draft an ordinance concerning
libelous publications was Sunday June 9<sup>th</sup>. According to his
journal-keeper, William Clayton (Quilliam Claypen), Jo spent most of the
day “home\[,\] health not very good. Lungs wearied.” However, that
afternoon, a steamer was due in Nauvoo from St. Louis, probably
containing converts travelling from Europe as well as supplies for the
Red Brick Store, or the Nauvoo House, or Temple projects. Jo dragged
himself out of bed and met them at the landing next to the unfinished
Nauvoo House. He then invited the new arrivals to stay at the mansion.
“Several passengers of th\[e\] “Osprey” from St. Louis. & Quincy put
up at the Mansion.” Then, in defiance of his ill-health, Jo “helpd carry
in their trunks. and chattd with them in the bar room”.

After entertaining his new guests for a little while at his Nauvoo
Mansion bar, Jo held a meeting beginning at 6 P.M. I can’t find any
notes or minutes about this meeting. The only source I could possibly
locate which may detail what happened in this meeting or who attended it
is Quilliam Claypen’s diary, but the church is still suppressing it so
if he made an entry that day there are only like 2 people alive today
who’ve seen it. Presumably it was attended by Quilliam, White-out
Willard Richards, and if I had to guess what it was concerning was the
resolution against libelous publications, which was an ordinance that
George W. Harris was drafting so he probably attended the meeting as
well.

Whatever happened in the meeting this Sunday night, George W. Harris
probably pulled an overnighter based on the meeting to finish drafting
the resolution which was ready to present the following day at the
Nauvoo City Council meeting.

The proceedings of this Monday city council meeting are absolutely
remarkable and there’s so much to tease out of it. We’re going to get
very familiar with the minutes of that day because, if you read the
title of the episode you know this already, but that meeting set into
motion the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor printing press that very
same evening.

The City Council convened at 10 A.M. the morning of June
10<sup>th</sup>, 1844. The called a quorum and read for approval the
minutes from the meeting of the previous Saturday, which we discussed
last week, then Jo and the city council members discussed the
allegations circulating about Jo attempting to buy Robert D. Bob the
Builder Foster’s silence with a hat full of money. That issue was the
centerpiece of discussion for basically the first half of the council
meeting.

On last week’s episode I referred to this letter saying I couldn’t find
it, well I found it. Bob-the Builder Foster was absolutely scathing in
his reply which explains why the council spent so much time talking
about Foster and the allegations about the hat full of money with
witnesses produced by Jo saying it never happened. Here’s the letter:

> Nauvoo, June 7, 1844.  
> GEN. J. SMITH:  
>   
> Sir: -- I have consulted my friends in relation to your proposals of
> settlement, and they, as well as myself, are of the opinion that your
> conduct, and that of your unworthy clan, is so base, that it would be
> morally wrong, and detract from the dignity of a gentleman, to hold
> conference with you -- the repeated insults and abuse, I, as well as
> my friends, have suffered from your unlawful course towards us, demand
> honorable resentment. We are resolved to make this our motto --
> nothing on our part has been done to provoke your anger; but have done
> all things as become man. You have trampled upon every thing we held
> dear and sacred -- you have set all law at defiance and profaned the
> name of the most high, to carry out your damnable purposes -- and I
> have nothing more to fear from you, than you have already threatened;
> and I, as well as my friends, will stay here, and maintain and magnify
> the law, as long as we do stay. We are resolved never to leave until
> we sell or exchange the property that we have here.  
>   
> The proposals made by your agent (D. Huntingdon) as well as the
> threats you sent to intimidate me, I disdain, and \[despise\], as I do
> the unhallowed author. The rights of my family and friends, demand at
> my hands a refusal of all your offers. We are united in virtue and
> truth, and we sell hell at defiance and all her agents.  
>                          Adieu,

We aren’t going to go through the discussion during the city council
meeting primarily because I think it’s reasonable that Jo tried to buy
Foster’s silence and Jo just spends the whole time calling witnesses to
disprove that such a thing ever happened. They also discuss the Laws as
being generally good people and grinding grain without fee for the poor,
which is kind of nice to see. Then they bicker about Jo giving William
Law some food for a public banquet which Law apparently claimed was his
own during the feast. Who knows what the reality is here because Jo was
doing everything possible to slander the Laws including accusing William
of essentially embezzling food. Finally though, on page 23 of the
council minute book we get to the meat of the meeting.

> George P. Stiles refrred to committee on claims Speci\[a\]l Committee
> reported A Bill—on Ordinance on Libels & for other puposes.—with
> preamble—

Whether it was George W. Robinson or George P. Stiles, the ordinance on
Libelous publications, proposed during the previous meeting, was ready
to be voted on. Let’s read it. This ordinance was what they passed
through the city council meeting this day which resulted in the
destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor.

I want to read the entire ordinance because I feel like it aptly
captures the mentality with which it was written. We gain a sense for
the desperation and timeliness of the ordinance by reading between the
lines and understanding the dire context in which the ordinance was
drafted passed. It begins with talking about how terribly persecuted the
Mormons are which seems to almost beg license to pass any oppressive
ordinance if there’s some kind of justification for it. It also vilifies
anybody opposing the City Council as blacklegs, highwaymen, murderers,
and all sorts of horrible terms. The Mormons, and by extension the
leadership, are innocent and these horrible people are trying to murder
the saints by publishing scandalous lies and false statements, but the
only reason they’re publishing such things in the first place is because
of revenge for disappointed lust, disappointed projects of speculation,
fraud, and sundry other unlawful designs. The only thing they want is to
bring the mob upon the persecuted saints and exterminate them again and
it all goes back to that original villain, John C. Wreck-it Bennett.
Let’s get into it.

> ORDINANCE CONCERNING LIBELS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
> 
> WHEREAS the saints in all ages of the world have suffered persecution
> and death, by wicked an corrupt men under the garb of a more holy
> appearance of religion; and where as the Church of Jesus Christ of
> Latter Day Saints from the moment that its first “truth sprang out of
> the earth” till now, has been persecuted with death, destruction, and
> extermination; and whereas men, to fulfill the scriptures, that a
> man’s enemies are they of his own household, have turned traitors in
> the church, and combined and leagued with the most corrupt scoundrels
> and villains that disgrace the earth unhung, for the heaven-daring and
> damnable purpose of revenge on account of disappointed lust,
> disappointed projects of speculation, fraud, and unlawful designs to
> rob and plunder mankind with impunity; and whereas such wicked and
> corrupt men have greatly facilitated their unlawful designs, horrid
> intentions, and murderous plans, by polluting, degrading, and
> converting the blessings and utility of the press, to the sin-smoking
> and blood-stained ruin of innocent communities, by publishing lies,
> false statements, coloring the truth, slandering men, women, children,
> societies, and countries, by polishing the characters of blacklegs,
> highwaymen, and murderers, as virtuous; and whereas a horrid, bloody,
> secret plan, upheld, sanctioned, and largely patronized by men in
> Nauvoo and out of it, who boast that all they want for the word “go,”
> to exterminate or ruin the Latter Day Saints, is, for them to do
> “*one*” unlawful act, and the work shall be done, is now fostered,
> cherished, and maturing in Nauvoo; by men too who helped to obtain the
> very charter they would break; and some of them drew up and voted for
> the very ordinances they are striving to use as a “scarecrow” to
> frighten the surrounding country in rebellion, mobbing and war; and
> whereas, while the blood of our brethren from wells, holes, and naked
> prairies, and the ravishment of female virtue from Missouri, and the
> smoke from the altars of infamy, prostituted by John C. Bennett, and
> continued in the full tide of experiment and disgraceful damnation, by
> the very self-called fragments of a body of degraded men that have got
> up a press in Nauvoo, to destroy the charter of the city; to destroy
> Mormonism, men, women, and children, *as Missouri did*, by force of
> arms; by *fostering laws that emanate* from corruption, and *betray
> with a kiss*; wherefore to honor the State of Illinois, and those
> patriots who gave the charter, and for the benefit, convenience,
> health, and happiness of said city:

That’s the preamble to the ordinance and 3 sections follow it containing
the action items of the ordinance itself. I struggle with how to
properly deal with the preamble because it is absolutely brimming with
propaganda and a one-sided telling of the story. What is notable,
however, is that the mentality captured here is the same mentality held
by millions of Mormons today. A people constructing their lives around
propaganda like this are infantilized; their perception of reality
effectively warped to see anything and everything that happens around
them being relative to this propaganda. They cede control of their lives
to the people who sit atop this system and give that license for those
select few to do whatever necessary to preserve the celestial monarchy.
Mind control is a complicated tool in the cult-leader’s toolbox but this
ordinance is a masterclass of how it works. It is because this
propaganda is so effective and resonates with members today that
wrongdoing and immorality on the part of church leaders is justified.
The act of open tyranny of burning down a hostile printing press is
justified because the people who published it were anti-Mormons and it
was nothing more than a rag of lies. To this day, a standing challenge
by friend of the show Jonathan Streeter has never been answered.
Streeter offers a cash reward to anybody who can disprove a single claim
made in the Nauvoo Expositor and not a single person has been paid. What
that means is it wasn’t this group of 7 publishers who were the enemy of
Joseph Smith and his criminal empire. It was the truth that was the
enemy. Any system of beliefs that requires their members to treat facts
and truth as the enemy is not worthy of preservation. It only deserves
derision, ridicule, and exposure. I digress. Let’s get into the actual
ordinances after the preamble.

> Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City council of the city of Nauvoo, that
> if any person or persons shall write or publish in said city, any
> false statement, or libel any of the citizens, for the purpose of
> exciting the public mind against the chartered privileges, peace, and
> good order of said city, or shall slander,… any portion of the
> inhabitants of said city, or bribe any portion of the citizens of said
> city for malicious purposes, or in any manner or form excite the
> prejudice of the community against any portion of the citizens of said
> city, for evil purposes, he, she, or they, shall be deemed disturbers
> of the peace, and upon conviction before the Mayor, or Municipal
> Court, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars,
> or imprisoned six months, or both, at the discretion of said Mayor or
> court.

Let’s deal with that. Anybody who publishes any false statement or
libels or slanders any figure, which is just another way of referring to
“false statements,” is fined $500 or imprisoned or both. How do we
determine what is or is not a false statement against people in the
city? How this should work is a person publishes a statement about
Joseph Smith, then he sues them for slander or libel, then the suit is
taken to a court and the parties enter discovery where the underlying
facts can be determined. If the statement is false, the people owe
damages to Joseph Smith. If the statement is true then the suit is
dismissed and Joseph owes legal fees to the parties. That’s how this
would work in a normal world where everybody abided by the same system
of laws, but this was Joseph Smith’s theocracy. Nothing was fair and
he’d done everything in his power to be completely untouchable.
Instead, what this would amount to is the person publishing statements
that Jo deems to be false. He would sue them in the Nauvoo Municipal
Court and the statements would be compared against Jo’s public
declarations. Witnesses would be produced on behalf of Joseph Smith and
the any witnesses who testified in behalf of the publisher of the
so-called false statements would be equally branded as an enemy to the
prophet and gospel. Then the municipal court would rule in favor of
Joseph Smith and the people would be fined $500 or imprisoned or both.
Who would determine what the punishment would be? Joseph Goddamn Smith.
He was absolutely out of control and he only played by the rules of his
own system of laws. Plus, he had years of public statements by which to
compare the allegations in the Nauvoo Expositor. He’d stated so many
times in public that spiritual wifery wasn’t going on in Nauvoo and even
if it was it was only because that horrible guy John C. Bennett was
doing it. He’d lied so much as a prophet of god that it could reasonably
be assumed that if he filed a lawsuit against the publishers of the
Nauvoo Expositor that he’d win the case. He constantly lied but he was
untouchable because Nauvoo was his criminal empire. This ordinance is,
by absolute terms, completely fascist in nature. I don’t use that term
lightly, listeners. In fact, I don’t think I’ve ever actually used the
term on the show before now, but it’s perfectly fitting. This is
authoritarian and nationalist when the nation is the Mormon nation of
Zion. It’s an exercise of dictatorial power. It is forcible suppression
of any opposition. The bill of rights was crafted with multiple
provisions to counter somebody like Joseph Smith rising to power out of
pure populism and theocratic control. The first amendment of free speech
is directly violated with this provision. The execution of this
ordinance could be construed as a violation of the fourth amendment as
it was an unlawful entrance by law enforcement officials to seize the
property of private citizens. The result of the ordinance completely did
away with the concept of a right to a speedy or fair trial before a
grand jury because those concepts were impossible to attain in Nauvoo so
the 5<sup>th</sup> and 6<sup>th</sup> amendments were violated.
Imprisoning people or fining them $500, or both, for publishing a
document in opposition to a public figure is absolutely cruel and
unusual punishment given the crime so it clearly violates the
8<sup>th</sup> amendment. Every single direction you analyze this first
provision in the ordinance and the eventual execution of it, Joseph
Smith violated at least half of the first amendments written into the
Bill of Rights. For all of Nauvoo history, Joseph Smith grew
increasingly fascist and this ordinance being passed was the culmination
of his dictatorship reaching the pinnacle of its history. Let’s read
section 2 of the ordinance.

> Sec. 2. Be it further ordained, that nothing in the foregoing section
> shall be so construed as to interfere with the right of any person to
> be tried by a jury of his vicinage; with the freedom of speech, or the
> liberty of the press, according to the most liberal meaning of the
> constitution, the dignity of freemen, the voice of truth, and the
> rules of virtue.

This second section is pure lip-service to insulate the ordinance from
being thrown out in total based on constitutional grounds. It states
explicitly that it shouldn’t be construed as violating freedom of speech
so if you interpret it that way it’s your fault and you’re choosing to
be offended. The third section just says it goes into effect immediately
upon passage, which was a direct violation of the Nauvoo Charter as it
required ordinances to be published before they went into effect, but
the city council violating its own charter is almost funny at this
point, isn’t it. This is small potatoes compared to the power granted by
this ordinance.

I have a bit more to say about the ordinance but we’ll save that for the
end. During the city council meeting when this was proposed, the council
deliberated about it for hours. They passed it that evening after all
the deliberation, but there was another interlocking piece to the
council meeting and that was with regards to how to implement this new
ordinance with respect to the Nauvoo Expositor. Much of the rest of the
meeting is various aldermen and Jo bickering about whether or not the
Nauvoo Expositor could be classified as a public nuisance now that it
had been deemed a libelous publication by the ordinance. Let’s get into
the meeting minutes.

> Mayor \[Joseph Smith\] said—if he had a city council who felt as he
> did, the estalbishmnt, (refering to the Nauvoo Expostor) would be a
> Nuisan\[c\]e before night.—and read an Editorial from the 2d No of the
> Nauvoo Expositor who ever said a word vs Judge Emmons until he has
> attacked this counil.—or ag\[a\]in\[s\]t, J\[oseph\] H. Jackson. or
> the Laws until they have come out against the city?—

So now Jo had the ordinance in hand and he needed to get the council to
agree the Expositor was a public nuisance before night. Notably, and
this has escaped every history I’ve ever read about this meeting, Jo
read an editorial from the 2<sup>nd</sup> number of the Expositor. Which
leads me to believe that the 2<sup>nd</sup> printing was ready to be
published when the Expositor was destroyed. That placed a greater sense
of urgency on the meeting because it was supposed to be a weekly issue
and time was ticking. The fact that Jo had the next edition in his hand
means he knew what they were going to publish next. We don’t know.
Historians don’t know because of what occurred that night, but Jo knew
and he took that information with him to the grave. Whatever was in that
second edition could never see the light of day. The first edition was
already causing enough damage and the next edition was clearly seen as a
second wind of a raging storm the empire couldn’t withstand. Next Jo
says:

> Here is a paper (Neauvoo Expositor.) that is exciting.—our enemies
> abroad,-- Joseph H. Jackson. has been proved—a murderer before this
> Council. and delard \[declared\] the paper a nuisance.
> 
> a greater nuisanc than a dead carcase—they make a criminality for a
> man to have a wife on the earth while he has one in heaven—according
> to the keys of the holy pristhood,…

Joseph H. Jackson is super tough to deal with. I’ll tell you what, let’s
get into him next week to contextualize a bit of his name making so many
appearances in these city council meetings. But, for now, according to
Jo, Jackson even agreed with Jo that the paper was a public nuisance and
he was a murderer so we can trust his judgement, right? The next point,
however, is such a bastardization of the polygamy revelation that I’m
legitimately stunned by it. They (meaning the publishers of the
Expositor) make a criminality for a man to have a wife on earth while he
has one in heaven. That is so brazenly and bold-faced lying by Joseph
Smith and so clearly not the issue at hand. There’s absolutely nothing
in the Nauvoo Expositor about serial monogamy or people marrying again
after divorce or widowing. That is so clearly not the problem it was
raising with polygamy and Joseph Smith is absolutely egregiously lying
when he brings up this point. He knows how wrong that assertion is and
what’s worse is he’s completely shameless about lying this openly and
obscuring the truth. What a pathetic display of human character this is.
Joseph Smith was a small and weak man who thrived off deception and
predation. When people got mad at him for being a predator and raping
people in every sense of the word, his true colors shine through the
historical record. He continues to gaslight the entire proceeding with
what he states next.

> Read statemets from Austin Cowles--& said he had never had any privite
> conversation with Austin Cowles on these subjcts, that he preahed on
> the stand from the bible showing the order in ancient days having
> nothing to do with the present time.

This was the point Jo made in the city council meeting 2 days ago. The
argument is that the revelation referred to in the Nauvoo Expositor was
to explain how god allowed the prophets of old to have multiple wives
but that the revelation was merely clarifying why it wasn’t a sin back
then. Once again this is so blatantly dishonest it boggles the mind. The
revelation, which you can read by opening up any modern-day D\&C to
section 132, uses biblical prophets as justification for the “New and
everlasting covenant unto my people”. It doesn’t clarify that the
biblical prophets weren’t sinning in god’s eyes out of mere curiosity,
it does so to justify practicing it in Nauvoo. Jo had painted himself so
deep into this corner and he resorted to his oldest habit of constant
and brazen lying to try and extricate himself from the hardship but that
doesn’t fly. He was lying. He knew he was lying. The majority of the
people sitting in the council that day knew he was lying. Anybody who
knows Nauvoo history and reads this knows he was lying. He was lying to
cover his own ass because he thought he was going to make it through
this storm just like he had every other storm to this point. He
continues his lying screed by vilifying the publishers by calling them
the opposition party and making assumptions about their motives. Of
course, none of them were allowed into this meeting to tell their side
of the story.

> What the opposition party wanted was to raise a mob on us and take the
> spoil of us as they did in Missouri

Fearmongering. Connecting Missouri mobocrats to anybody who opposes the
Nauvoo empire. There are so many ways to look at this and I’ll just
plant my flag here. Jo deserved the mob. The Mormons didn’t the wider
Mormon leadership didn’t deserve a mob coming into Nauvoo to arrest
Joseph Smith but Jo himself deserved some form of justice. He should
have faced the gallows half a decade ago if Missouri hadn’t botched the
Missouri-Mormon war inquiry but since then Jo was living on borrowed
time. I’m an avowed pacifist but by the legal standards of the day
Joseph absolutely deserved the death penalty and I have absolutely no
remorse in holding that opinion. He’d built his life on lies and the
bodies of his legion of sycophants. He raped women and girls through
deliberate and years’ long grooming processes. He abused his power and
was a corrupt monster. Any punishment a vigilante mob could dish out to
him wouldn’t be enough to pay for how disgraceful and evil Joseph Smith
was.

The next passage is cryptic and requires some background. Robert B.
Thompson was Jo’s personal scribe off and on throughout the last couple
years of Kirtland, all of Missouri, and the first two years of Nauvoo.
Robert B. Thompson and Jo’s youngest brother, Don Carlos Smith, worked
together in a dank and smelly basement printing the Times and Seasons
from 1839 to 1841. Unexpectedly, both of them died. Historians have
pointed to the basement they were working in having some kind of mold or
fungus growing on the walls which caused respiratory failure for both of
them as they died around the same time. Notably, however, both were
anti-polygamists when the practice was beginning to expand beyond just
Joseph Smith having a few clandestine wives nobody knew about. Thompson
and Don Carlos had a conversation about polygamy and Don Carlos called
it from the devil. A few weeks later both were dead and only 3 months
after that Jo took Don Carlos’s widow Agnes Coolbrith Smith Smith as a
plural wife.

Why is that relevant? Because of this little cryptic line Jo said in the
city council meeting.

> Said that he had as much as he could do to keep his clerk \[Robert
> B.\] Thompson from publishing the proceedings of the Laws. and caused
> the people to—

And there it’s cut off. Robert B. Thompson was dead for 3 years before
the Laws became enemies of Joseph Smith. What was he saying? What was he
talking about? And why is it cut off in the middle of the sentence? The
Nauvoo Expositor was publishing the proceedings of polygamy in Nauvoo,
was Robert B. Thompson contemplating the same before his abrupt illness
ended his life? I don’t know what to make of it but what Jo said after
it that was picked up by the clerk is interesting.

> said he \[Joseph Smith\] would rather die to morrow and have the thing
> \[Expositor printing press\] smashed,--than live & have it go on.

I’ve never seen a prophecy from Joseph Smith come true so spectacularly
and accurately as this. The meeting kind of scatters around from denying
the revelation as being current, to slandering the Laws, to more
outright lies from both Jo and Hyrum sidekick-Abiff Smith. A guy named
Peter Haws was sworn in to testify about Wilson Law. We’ve only ever
referred to Haws before and always in connection with the Nauvoo House
project. He’s just a run-of-the-mill Joseph Smith sycophant but he took
the stand to provide his testimony about some very disturbing conduct by
Wilson Law. It’s tough to know whether these allegations are true
because the women themselves were absolutely NEVER called in to testify
about stuff like this. What’s more troubling about it is the things Haws
claims Wilson Law did are exactly what Jo had done to victimize women
and girls many times.

> [Peter
> Hawes](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5211571881301404625) referrd
> to \<​a​\> Mr Smith who came
> from [Englad](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10358216139998683446),— and
> was taken sick,— and died, The children had no one to p\[r\]otect
> them, \<​there was​\> one girl 16 or 17 years old.— & a yonger
> sister.— [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#1941442377513174643) took
> in these girls out of pity. [Wilson
> Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#4198560742021516414) was
> familiar with the oldest
> daughter, [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5264570469184600991) cautiond
> the
> girl.— [wilson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#17607517484058768660) was
> soon th\[e\]re again and out in the evinng \[evening\]. Charged the
> girl & she confimd \[confirmed\] to witness
> wife [Wilson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#3645681794800075104) had
> seduced
> her. [Witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#13588806841631433867) told her
> he could not keep her— girls wept and made much ado— made meny
> p\[r\]omises— [witness](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#17800907764984343311) told
> her if she would do right she might stay, but she did not,
> keep— [Wilson](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#10421704030108019580) came
> & she wint agin.—
> 
> Mayor— said certain women came to complain to
> his [wife](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#5935170478968691463) that
> they had caught [Wilson
> Law](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#14251062156897183812) with
> the girl on the floor— at ~~Br.~~ [Mr
> Hawes](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/22#16471462630091714713)—
> in the night

It’s super hard to know what is real here because these witnesses were
called to vindicate Jo and vilify the Laws, but maybe Wilson Law was
also a predator. We saw the character assassination campaign very
successfully executed against Charles A. Foster on the episode about the
Fosters and witnesses were produced to turn him into a complete monster
who sexually assaulted 3 different women. Whether Charles Foster did it
or not is a tough question just like with Wilson Law here. We do know
that if these men were raping women they were doing so using the same
justifications Joseph Smith was using to justify his rape. That it was
right in biblical times and it’s a new and everlasting covenant. The
where there was no witness there was no crime and there was no sin in it
if she kept the secret to herself. God it would have sucked to be a
woman living in Nauvoo at this time. I mean it would have sucked for
anybody but being the constant prey of this rape cabal is just more than
I can even begin to wrap my mind around.

Next Hyrum takes seriously his duty as Sidekick-Abiff by taking the
stand.

> C. H. Smith.—spoke to show the falsehoods of Austin Cowles in relation
> to the revelatin referred to.—that it referred to fo\[r\]mer days—not
> the presnt time as stated by Cowles.

It’s a lie. It’s just a lie.

> Mayor said he had never preched the revelatin in private as he had in
> public—had not taught \<it\> to the anointed in the church \<in
> p\[r\]ivate\> which ma\[n\]y confirmed.—

It wasn’t just Hyrum lying to protect Jo, it was the entire government
of the Nauvoo city council. Every single on of them stood up there and
lied and those who weren’t insiders either chose to believe the lies or
just live with cognitive dissonance.

Then Jo continued to talk on the stand about eternal marriage and how in
the resurrection people aren’t married. Anybody who isn’t married on
earth with eternal sealing powers must remain as angles in heaven.
However, he wraps the screed with an actionable item which became the
focus of the meeting from that time forward.

> In explanation of the principls was willing for one to subscribe his
> name to declare that paper & the whole establishmnt a nnuisance.

After Jo said that they adjourned for lunch and reconvened 41 minutes
later and read the ordinance we opened the show with again and Jo
amended the language a little bit. After these additions, if the
implications of the meeting weren’t clear enough Jo made a stand and
drew a line.

Mayor said no man would join the \[illegible\] who \<votes\> not guilty.

What is that illegible word\!?\! Annie and I both spent way too much
time on this word and the only thing we could make of it was “clayed,”
which was a common poetic term for the body separate from the spirit. At
least, that’s the only word that sort of fits within the context and the
written word looks to spell “clayed”. The point remains the same, if a
person votes not guilty on the Nauvoo Expositor being a public nuisance,
they are not of the body of the leadership. Therefore, that person has
now become an enemy in league with the Expositor publishers.

The actionable item came up for a vote, proposed by Mayor king Jo.

> Motioned by Mayor 2d by C. H. Smith that the bill pass and carried
> unanimously:--satisfied with title “An ordinance concerning libels and
> for other purposes.”
> 
> Mayor Said the Constitution did not authorize \<the\> press to publish
> Libels—And proposed the council make some provision for putting-down
> the Nauvoo Expositors.

Now the ordinance we read through earlier was voted on and accepted as a
new ordinance governing the city of Nauvoo. As the astute legal scholar
he was, Jo determined that the Nauvoo Expositor was an unacceptable form
of free-speech. Unfortunately the Constitution doesn’t address libel or
slander directly, it merely creates the provision for freedom of speech.
State constitutions and laws govern how slander and libel cases are
handled but the federal constitution does nothing of the sort so he’s
either lying or ignorant or a dangerous dose of both. He did have a
point though, just passing the ordinance didn’t deal with the problem at
hand with any sense of immediacy because he’d need to sue the publishers
of the Expositor and take them through the courts to get an injunction
against them continuing to print. Because the circuit court was out of
session in June until October, that would take months before going into
effect and who knows what they’d print in that intervening period. Time
was of the essence and if he could get the city council to agree that
the Expositor was a public nuisance then they’d have some semblance of
pseudo-legal justification for immediately halting its print.

The council sent Marshal John P. Greene to acquire a copy of the
Expositor and its prospectus from May 10<sup>th</sup>, after which Jo
read some portions of it to the council where it just says “and spoke at
great length” without any further detail. After Jo talked for a while on
this, Hyrum took the stand to back up his little brother. Then John
Taylor, second prophet of the Salt Lake City church, concurred.

> C. H. Smith spoke in favor of declaring the Expositor a Nuisance
> 
> C. \[John\] Taylor said no city on earth would bear such slander and
> he would not bear it.—and spoke decidedly in favor of active
> measures.—

They went back and forth on this for a while even calling on the names
of William and Wilson Law as well as the editor of the Expositor,
Sylvester Emmons.

> C. Taylor—continud Wilson Law was presidnt of this council—Wm Law. &
> \[Sylvester\] Emenos were members--\&Emmons has never objected to any
> ordinance—has been more like a cypher—and read from the constitution
> of the U.S. on freedom of the press.—we are willing th\[e\]y should
> publish the truth—but the paper is a nuisanc—and stinks in the nose of
> every honest man.—

After John Taylor spoke about the freedom of speech not covering the
Nauvoo Expositor because the city government doesn’t agree with it, the
council heard “Resolution \<on\> nuisances read—“. We’ll get to that
resolution soon here but the deliberations which follow it provide a
window into what the council was discussing.

> C. \[George P.\] Stiles spoke Nuisanc is any thing distu\[r\]bs the
> peace of community.--\&Read. Chitty’s Blackston page 4. Priest wrongs
> Vol 2,--and said the whole commun\[i\]ty have to rest under the stigma
> of these faslehoods—if we can prevnt the issiung of any more
> slanderouss \<communications\> he would go in for it.—it is right for
> this community to show a proper resentmnt—I would go in for
> suppressing all further publicants of the kind.—

A public nuisance is something which had been leveraged in Nauvoo
before; like in the case of John C. Wreck-it Bennett’s brothel when the
city decided to dump the whole building in a ditch. But, the way they’re
currently utilizing public nuisance was exactly unconstitutional and
absolutely no reading of any ordinance concerning public nuisances would
allow government officials to burn down a printing press. Imagine if my
neighbors car alarm going off 6 times a day was something I declared as
a public nuisance, that doesn’t give me license to set their car on
fire. I’d like to read out of the same book these guys read,
Blackstone’s 1840 commentary on law, which summarizes this council
meeting incredibly well just one page after what they read.

> The mischiefs that have arisen to the public from inconsiderate
> alterations in our laws, are too obvious to be called in question; and
> how far they have been owing to the defective education of our
> senators, is a point well worthy the public attention. The common law
> of England has fared like other venerable edifices of antiquity, which
> rash and unexperienced workmen have ventured to new-dress and refine,
> with all the rage of modern improvement. Hence frequently its symmetry
> has been destroyed, it proportions distorted, and its majestic
> simplicity exchanged, for specious embellishments and fantastic
> novelties. For, to say the truth, almost all the perplexed questions,
> almost all the niceties, intricacies, and delays… owe their original
> not to the common law itself, but to innovations that have been made
> in it by acts of parliament, overladen… with provisions and additions,
> and many times on a sudden penned or corrected by men of none or very
> little judgement in law.

The guys in this city council were doing just that and fit the bill
perfectly of having very little judgement of law. They were
fundamentally altering laws and passing ordinances to deal with very
specific scenarios and altering or creating them to serve their own
spurious ends. That’s great for the moment it passes, at least for them,
but the same provisions could be weaponized by an opposition party.
Alternate history of Nauvoo could see the Mormon power waning in city
government and being held by a majority of non-Mormons declaring the
Times & Seasons to be a public nuisance and suddenly the right of the
Mormons to free-speech is quashed the way they quashed that of the
Expositor publishers in this very council meeting. Laws are made to
protect people, not elevate only some people… at least… that’s how it
should be. People should not fear their governments; governments should
fear their people.

The meeting continues and everybody jumped on board… for the most part.

> C. H. Smith be\[lie\]ved the best way to smash the press all to pieces
> and pie the type.
> 
> \<C.\> A\[aron\] Johnson concurrd with what other counsellrs had
> said,--
> 
> A.\[Samuel\] Bennett referd to the statement of the Expositor relative
> to the Muncpal cort in case of Jiremah Smith.—considrd it a public
> Nuissnc

But, the excitement of the meeting was briefly tempered. All these
members of the Council wanted to burn the printing press that night, but
cooler heads were also present.

> B\[enjamin\]. Warringtn—consi\[de\]red his peculiar situatin for the
> city concil to pass this a nuisance would be hasty. & propoe givng a
> few days limatin \[limitation\]--& assess a fine of $3000.00 for every
> libel.--& if they would not cease publishing libe\[l\]s declare it a
> nuisance.

This is an interesting solution. Simply fine the publishers $3 grand for
every allegation made which was libelous and if they didn’t stop
publishing then declare it a nuisance and take action. He simply didn’t
want the council to be too hasty in passing this nuisance declaration
because he knew things were spiraling out of control. But, the battle
lines had been drawn by the Mayor and his response is very telling.

\<Mayor was sorry to have one dissentig voice--\>

Anybody dissenting during this meeting was immediately on the outs and
Benjamin Warrington immediately realized his mistake.

C. Warrington did not mean to be undstood to go vs but not be in haste

He was simply trying to be reasonable but Joseph Smith was not a
reasonable man, especially during this time. The council then features
Hyrum Smith talking about the property holdings of the publishers,
likely within the context of discussing how that property could be
leveraged by fining the publishers until the Expositor could be called a
public nuisance, like Warrington had suggested. If the city council
could just fine these guys every day eventually they could take control
of all their property. Really good guys here. Fine publishers of a
dissenting press until their property is deeded to the council because
of the debt incurred by those fines. But, in answer to Hyrum making this
point, Alderman Elias Smith spoke:

> conserd there is but on cou\[r\]se to pursue they were out of the
> re\[a\]ch of the law,--one couse to put an end to the thing at
> once.—beleivd if the city did not do it othrs would.—by what he had
> heard.

So, if the council doesn’t decide to burn down the Expositor printing
press, the people would so we better do it officially instead of leaving
it to vigilante Mormon mobs in Nauvoo.

Then Orson Spencer took the floor to deliberate. Worth noting, this is
the alderman who had a fight with his brother, Augustine, which spiraled
out of control when Marshal John P. Greene tried to arrest him and
deputize William Law and the Fosters. In response, Charles Foster
pointed a double-barreled pistol at Joseph Smith and nearly shot him on
the spot if he hadn’t been disarmed. This is what Orson Spencer says.

> Spencer accorded with the viws expersed, that this paper is a nuisane,
> did not consider it wis\[e\] to give th\[e\]m ~~time~~ to trupret
> \[trumpet\] a thou\[sa\]ndl ies this proprty could not pay for.—If we
> pass only a fine or impisment, have we any confidace that they will
> d\[e\]sist? None at all,--fo\[u\]nd these men \[covenant\] breakers.
> with God with their wives. \&c. have we any hope of their doing
> better—Their characters have gone before them…
> 
> Shall they be suffrd to go on. No I had rather my blood would be
> spilld.—and would like to have the press removed as soon as the
> ordinace will allow,--wished the matter be put in the hnds of the
> Mayor and evry body stand by him,--in the excutin of his duties.—and
> hush evry murmur—

Then councilor Levi Richards took the floor to concur in what was
passing. The reasonable voices like that of Benjamin Warrington were
simply not welcome in this meeting.

> Richards said he had felt deeply on this subject.—and concurred fully
> in gen smiths views as expressed this day.—considrd private interest
> as nothing in comparison with the public good. Eve\[r\]y time a line
> was formed in [Far
> West](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#8681886484850554978) he
> was thence, for what, to defend themse\[l\]ves agant just such
> schoudrels \[scoundrels\] as as are now fighting agist us.— considerd
> the doings of the counil this day of immence moment. not
> to this [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#8994991781533901228) alone
> but to the whole wold.— would go in to put a stop to this thing at
> once—— Let the thing be throwd out of
> this [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#12079769628572724935)—
> and have the responsbity \[responsibility\] off his shouldare & let it
> fall on, the state
> of [Illins](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#10553112575155519708) [Gov](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#15479441034568719578)—

Solidifying the connection between so-called persecution in Missouri
with the so-called persecution of the Nauvoo Expositor, councilor
Phineas Richards took the floor with a personal touch.

> C. [P\[hineas\]
> Richards](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#12769625817839800812) .
> . . referd to the scurry at [Haun
> Mills](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#10479722328990348312)—
> & the death of his son at that place. I said he could not sit still
> when he saw the same spirit arisng in this place.—— and he considrd
> the publis\[h\]ers of the Expostors as much murderes at heart as David
> was before the death of Uriah. \<​was for making a shrt wor\[k\] of
> it——​\> was prepard to take his stnd by the Mayor & whatevr he
> propse \[proposed\] would stnd by by him to the last—— the quicker it
> is stopped the bettr.—

Now they needed an astute legal mind to give them license to carry this
out with some form of quasi-legal justification. William Wines
Double-dub Phelps took the floor to provide the assurance the council
sought.

> [C.
> Phelps](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#145332558608417889)—— had
> investigatd the constitutin, Chater, & laws.— the power to declare
> that office a nuisac is grnted to us in the Springfield Chater, and a
> relosutin \[resolution\] dclaring it a nuisane is all that is reqired.

After Phelps told everybody they could burn down the Expositor printing
press, a cooler head once again spoke up. The meeting was obviously
trending toward burning it to the ground before nightfall and Stephen
Markham decided it was time to consider the consequences once the public
nuisance order was carried into effect.

> [Stephn Markam \[Stephen
> Markham\]](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#8097680140878585940).—
> Sworn [F. M.
> Higbee](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#7366679812605080517) said
> the Inhabates \[inhabitants?\] of
> ths [city](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#7302625584606509993) is
> done the minut a hand is laid on this press—

This was a legitimate fear. Markham was a cool-headed and calculating
guy. He was trusted enough by Jo to handle church finances that when we
introduced him over 100 episodes ago I gave him the name of piggy-bank
Steve. Markham knew that destroying the Expositor would bring out the
city in riots and the outside forces opposed to Mormon tyranny would
become increasingly excited at this overt action of fascism. However,
his collected and intelligent council was not heeded.

> Aldrman Harris spoke from the chiar, exprssed his feeligs that the
> p\[r\]ess ought to be demolish
> 
> Resoluti\[o\]n on the printing press. Read, and passed.

Here’s the text of the resolution from page 535 of volume 6 of the Vogel
HoC

> *Resolved* by the City Council of the city of Nauvoo, that the
> printing-office from whence issues the *Nauvoo Expositor* is a public
> nuisance, and also all of said *Nauvoo Expositors*, which may be, or
> exist in said establishment, and the Mayor is instructed to cause said
> printing establishment and papers to be removed without delay, in such
> manner as he shall direct. Passed June 10, 1844 GEO\[RGE\] W. HARRIS
> President pro tem. W. Richards, Recorder.

The die had been cast and everybody’s fate was set. The Council meeting
adjourned at 10 minutes past 6 and Jo immediately wrote two orders.

The first:

> *To the marshal of said City, greeting:*
> 
> You are hereby commanded to destroy the printing press from whence
> issues the *Nauvoo Expositor*, and pi the type of said printing
> establishment in the street, and burn all the *Expositors* and
> libelous handbills found in said establishment, and if resistance be
> offered to your execution of this order by the owners or others,
> demolish the house; and if anyone threatens you, or the Mayor, or the
> officers of the city, arrest those who threaten you, and fail not to
> execute this order without delay; and make due return hereon.
> 
> By order of the City Council, JOSEPH SMITH, Mayor.

This was the order by Joseph Smith to the marshal, John P. Greene to
burn the Nauvoo Expositor to the ground. If anybody opposes this action
or threatens him or Joseph Smith, arrest them. Jo also knew this would
likely cause a riot so he wrote a second order, this time to Jonathan
Dunham, Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion since John C. Wreck-it
Bennett had resigned his position in the Legion and left the city.

> You are hereby commanded to hold the Nauvoo Legion in readiness
> forthwith to assist the Marshal of said city to execute the city
> ordinanes, and especially to remove the printing establishment of the
> *Nauvoo Expositor*, and this you are required to do at sight, under
> the penalty of the laws; provided the Marshal shall require it, and
> need your services. JOSEPH SMITH, Lieut.-General Nauvoo Legion.

It wasn’t just Marshal John P. Greene who was commanded to destroy the
Expositor printing press, the entire Nauvoo Legion was put on guard in
case a riot broke out. This was an unofficial declaration of martial law
in Nauvoo for the space of one evening which was absolutely necessary
because at approximately 8 p.m., less than 2 hours after the city
council meeting adjourned, Marshal Greene gathered his supplies, some
kerosene and fire-lighting implements. Jonathan Dunham gathered a few
captains of the Legion with their platoons, and a mob of a few dozen
men, acting under direct order from Joseph Smith, gathered on the street
in front of the Expositor printing press with their torches blazing.

As evening turned into twilight and the sun set on this warm and muggy
evening of June 10, 1844, Marshal John P. Green broke into the office
housing the Nauvoo Expositor printing press by bashing through the door
with a sledgehammer. A few dozen men, estimates and participants vary
depending on the account, but some say as many as hundreds of men,
pushed into the door behind the Marshal. Inside the office they found
hundreds of pages of printed paper drying, reams of clean paper awaiting
words, the printing press machine itself, and the type cases containing
thousands of little metal letters and hundreds of type cassettes to
contain the words calculated to bring a religious empire to its knees.
One account claimed Joseph Smith was a participant in this monumental
event but every one of the men there that night had sworn oaths to
uphold the duties of their offices as members of the city peace
officers, members of the Nauvoo Legion, or members of the secretive
shadow squad, the Danites.

As these men pushed into the office, they ransacked it. Every ream of
paper was dragged out of the office, the drawers of the type cases were
ripped open and the type tossed out onto the street in front of the
office. Stacks of the second edition of the Expositor, awaiting
dissemination, were thrown into the street. Then, these men resorted to
their most basic instincts. I don’t like something, so I’ll smash it.
Each man, armed with pistols, swords, bowie knives, muskets,
sledgehammers, and myriad other destructive implements, swung their
weapons around with absolute reckless abandon. Walls, desks and
counters, furniture, everything was destroyed. They paid special
attention to the printing press itself. The pulled it up from its
moorings in the floor and half a dozen men dragged the massive iron
implement, probably weighing over a thousand pounds, into the street
with all the paper and type. Then… they went to work on it. Each man
wielding a sledgehammer took swing after swing. Blow after blow slammed
into the garter and spindle, the coffin and stone, ripped the handles
from their mechanisms, blew holes in the carriage, ripped off the plank;
after a few minutes the press was unrecognizable as a machine of equal
amounts information and disinformation. The printing office was
destroyed. The press was destroyed. Hundreds of dollars of paper and
typeset were destroyed and the entire pile of paper, press, and type was
set ablaze. The flame grew and grew until it consumed all the paper and
turned the small metal type pieces underneath it to smoldering chunks of
smoke-colored iron. The press itself would never be usable again.

A fire brings out the neighborhood nowadays but in the 1840s with no
fire department, no fire engines, and only bucket brigades to answer the
call, the townsfolk of Nauvoo gathered to witness what was going on.
Upon arriving to the blaze from wherever they came, citizens saw the
marshal, possibly hundreds of Nauvoo Legionnaires, and a pile of paper
and twisted metal burning dozens of feet high in the middle of the
street.

John P. Greene, city Marshal of Nauvoo who executed the Mayor’s orders,
scribbled on a piece of paper and sent it to Jo with one sentence that
would spell the death of the prophet. “The within-named press and type
is destroyed and pied according to order, on this 10<sup>th</sup> day of
June, 1844, at about 8 o’clock, p.m. J.P. GREENE, C.M.”

Look… society isn’t equipped to handle people like Joseph Smith. We all
abide by a system of laws and an unwritten set of manners within the
social contract. Those who don’t abide by the system fall into a
category of either punishment by the system or benefitting from the
manipulation of that system of society. Jo did everything in his power
to be on the latter end of that equation and doing so required he act in
deplorable and monstrous ways. He was immune to the laws. He was a
predator upon anything to satisfy his avarice. He was a tyrant to
opposition. He was, in every sense of the phrase, a force of nature to
be reckoned with. Laws exist to stop people like Joseph Smith but what
if he doesn’t agree to them? Hey, you can’t do that\! Yeah? And what if
I do? Well… you can’t\! Well I say that I can and you can’t stop me.
We’ll throw you in jail if you do that\! Jo’s only retort, I’d like to
see you try. Living this life may have been exciting and dangerous, but
it wasn’t sustainable. He’d rolled 7s so many times and his luck was
bound to run out. A person can only piss off so many people before those
people become mad as hell and stand up in defiance and say I’m not going
to take it anymore. The Expositor publishers did just that. Jo took the
blow and fired one back. Like a warrior with a pin-sized wound unaware
of a punctured vital organ, that first shot would prove to be enough.
But a wounded animal is always the most dangerous.
