---
layout: post
title: >
    Ep 204 - Joseph H. Jackson and Nauvoo Bogus
episode_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/episode-204-joseph-h-jackson-nauvoo-bogus/
libsyn_url: https://nakedmormonismpodcast.libsyn.com/ep-204-joseph-h-jackson-and-nauvoo-bogus
category: History
date: 2020-04-24 03:00:00 +0000
---

Ep 204 – Joseph H. Jackson and Nauvoo Bogus

On this episode, we take the opportunity to examine an enigmatic figure
of Nauvoo Mormon history, Joseph H. Jackson. He visited the settlement
in late 1842 where he was branded a Missouri spy and a Danite attempted
to assassinate him. From that point forward he vowed revenge on the man
responsible for nearly taking his life, Joseph Smith. Jackson
ingratiated himself into the highest ranks of Nauvoo leadership and even
participated in multiple secretive Danite missions to Missouri to break
Porter Rockwell out of prison and kidnap two people who were set to
testify against Joseph Smith in a Missouri court hearing. Jackson’s
chief source of income during 1843-44 was manufacturing bogus coins
(counterfeit) and his story is stranger than fiction as he himself
stands as a wonderful personification of counterfeit. We discuss his
dealings, misdealings, and maneuvers which illustrate a strong sense of
self-preservation.

Links:

Joseph H. Jackson June 1844 expose  
<http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu/IL/sign1844.htm>

Council of Fifty Minutes  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/council-of-fifty-minutes-march-1844-january-1846-volume-1-10-march-1844-1-march-1845/98#full-transcript>

Lucy Mack Smith Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith  
<https://archive.org/details/BiographicalSketchesOfJosephSmithTheProphet/mode/2up>

Thomas Ford’s History of Illinois  
<https://archive.org/details/ahistoryillinoi00shiegoog/page/n342/mode/2up/search/nauvoo>

HoC volume 6  
<https://byustudies.byu.edu/content/volume-6-chapter-19>

Nauvoo City Council Minutes  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-rough-minute-book-february-1844-january-1845/28#full-transcript>

JS 1844 journal  
<https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/journal-december-1842-june-1844-book-4-1-march-22-june-1844/149#full-transcript>

How to find Chris Smith:

<https://www.facebook.com/ccsmith3>

<https://twitter.com/christophcsmith> @christophcsmith

Show links:

Website [http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com](http://nakedmormonismpodcast.com/)  
Twitter [@NakedMormonism](https://twitter.com/NakedMormonism)  
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Naked-Mormonism/370003839816311>  
Patreon <http://patreon.com/nakedmormonism>  
Music by Jason Comeau <http://aloststateofmind.bandcamp.com/>  
Show Artwork <http://weirdmormonshit.com/>  
Legal Counsel <http://patorrez.com/>

A detail within Nauvoo Mormon history which often escapes analysis and
mention, and has only been mentioned in passing on this show for a few
years now, is counterfeit money. Bogus making. When Jo sought to
establish his kingdom on the Mississippi, the Mormons were destitute and
he signed his name to dozens of land contracts with half a dozen
speculators to acquire the land for the Mormons to settle in Illinois
and the Iowa territory.

However, the Mormons needed some liquid capital to work with and
therefore the Nauvoo House Association was conceived. It was to be the
premier hotel in Illinois, set to curry favor with powerful politicians
and dignitaries upon their arrival to the city after landing on the
wharf of the Mississippi. Established by the Nauvoo City Charter and
modern D\&C 124, the Nauvoo House was created with stocks to be
purchased for $50 a share to raise capital for the project and create
liquidity as a new form of money.

The Nauvoo House was a massive resource vacuum and it never made any
money, rendering the stock certificates printed for it essentially
valueless within a few months of being printed. That didn’t stop the
House Association from continuing to print and sell more, but it did
make people less willing to trade using them.

The lack of capital problem needed to be solved in other ways. One of
these was by creating the Temple Building Committee. This building
committee would take donations from Mormons, sometimes money but usually
in goods. Then it would issue people who worked on the temple
certificates for their work which they could use to purchase goods from
the temple building committee store. Any donations made were recorded in
the Book of the Law of the Lord, or the BoLoL as we’ve called it on the
show. This had the effect of raising capital, getting labor done on the
temple at nearly no cost, and created a new form of money to exchange,
the temple store certificates.

These were only a few of the systems to help create or raise some money.
Understandably, a lot of holes remained and money was always needed. To
answer this need, the Mormon leadership engaged in a practice many of
them had dabbled in individually before Nauvoo, but never at a
systematic city-wide level, counterfeiting. Some of the hottest
collector items among Mormon artifact collectors today are Nauvoo bogus
coins. Bogus means counterfeit coins.

In order to discuss this topic today, we’re going to give a proper
treatment to a figure in Mormon history who was constantly involved in
counterfeit. If there’s a single figure in Nauvoo history who
personifies counterfeit, it’s Joseph H. Jackson.

We’ve already discussed Jackson quite a bit, including his meetings with
Joseph Smith and his mission to break Porter Rockwell out of jail in
Missouri that’s episodes 142 and 144, but I think we need a full episode
dedicated to his story in order to slot him into the larger timeline of
Nauvoo and discuss the topic of bogus and counterfeit.

Nineteenth-century Illinois historian Thomas Gregg summarized Joseph
Jackson’s role in Mormon history as follows: Jackson “went to Nauvoo and
became quite intimate with Smith and the leaders; afterwards turned
against them—went to Warsaw and issued a pamphlet claiming to be an
exposé of Mormonism and the evil purposes and practices of the prophet …
charges of murder and conspiracy, of counterfeiting, debauchery,
‘spiritual-wifery,’ etc., ... If half of Jackson’s statements were
true, the prophet and some of his abettors should have been hung; if not
true, Jackson himself should have been hung—in either case without
benefit of
clergy.”[<u>\[1\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn1)
By the end of this episode, I think you’ll find that most of Jackson’s
statements were indeed true, and Joseph Smith and some of his abettors
should indeed have been hung by this standard, as well as the legal
standards of the 1840s. The way I’ve heard it described when talking to
one of the foremost historians of Nauvoo Mormonism, Joseph Johnstun, was
that Joseph Jackson’s expose should be regarded with skepticism when he
talks about his role or his own competence, not necessarily the material
facts he presents. He messes with the information to make himself out to
be some kind of hero and scrub his own name of any wrongdoing, but the
kernels of history data he provides are mostly accurate.

There’s a lot we don’t know about Joseph Jackson. For starters, we don’t
when he was born or where he came from. His biography before he came to
Nauvoo is almost a complete mystery. Jackson says he told Joseph Smith
that he was a fugitive from justice in Macon City,
Georgia.[<u>\[2\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn2)
As far as I know, no historian has been able to verify this, although
Kathleen Melanokos notes that Macon, Georgia was the “home of a gang of
horse thieves, robbers, and murderers known as the ‘Pony Club.’”
According to Joseph Smith, Jackson introduced himself as a Catholic
priest. Mormon apologist Brian Hauglid thinks this was a lie, and Brian
might be right, but again, as far as I know, we have no evidence one way
or another regarding whether Jackson had taken holy orders in the
Catholic Church. He didn’t act much like a priest, but maybe that’s
because he used the priesthood as a cover for criminal activity.
Naturally, this put him in rather good company with Joseph Smith.

Nineteenth-century Illinois historian Thomas Gregg illustrates the
confusion about Jackson’s background. In his 1890 history of Mormonism,
Gregg described Jackson as “an adventurer of fine appearance and
gentlemanly manners.” But on the very next page, he notes that the
Mormons considered him “an adventurer of the worst class—himself a
counterfeiter, etc.”

It seems that descriptions of Joseph Jackson seem to adapt dependent on
who you ask and when because he was yet another man who joined the
church sort of, quickly rose through the ranks, then left the church and
city of Nauvoo volcanically at a controversial time. He was also an
opportunist. He saw the Mormon settlement as an opportunity and as we’ll
see through our examination of him, Jackson seemed to try and keep at
least one finger in every pie around the city. He’d aided and abetted
with the enemies of the church, the Laws Higbees and Fosters, while
simultaneously funneling information back to Joseph Smith about their
conduct. In some kind of spy movie, he’s like a quadruple agent who we
find out at the end that he was only in it for selfish motives to begin
with. He’s just a really hard guy to nail down and he’s far from
trustworthy.

What we do know is that Jackson first arrived in Nauvoo by way of the
Mississippi River. He says he came “down” the river, which implies he
started the trip upriver, in northern Illinois or Wisconsin. He says he
stopped in Nauvoo on October 10, 1842, “partly to find business and
partly to \[gratify his\] curiosity” about the Mormons. He took a job
there working for a non-Mormon grocer named John M. Finch.

Jackson arrived in Nauvoo shortly after Porter Rockwell tried to
assassinate Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs. Tensions between Mormons
and Missourians were high, and the Mormons were on high alert for
Missourian spies. Soon after Jackson’s arrival, several of Joseph
Smith’s henchmen visited his boarding house “and asked all manner of
questions in relation to my business in the city.” Jackson didn’t
understand why he was being interrogated, so he refused to answer the
questions. Afterward, he noticed that he was often followed, and a
friend warned him that the Mormons suspected he was a Missourian spy.

One night sometime in November 1842, Jackson was helping his employer
haul some goods from the river. Jackson was riding in a wagon after dark
when suddenly a man in another wagon called out to him, “Jackson, is
that you?” and asked him to come over. Jackson got out of the wagon and
approached the stranger, who had also dismounted from his own wagon.
When the two men got within five feet of each other, the stranger
extended his arm toward Jackson and said, “damn you, I give you what you
deserve,” and then fired a pistol at him. The bullet whizzed past his
head. He was so close to the assassin that he had gunpowder burns on his
face. His employer, John Finch, came running, and the assassin fled.
However, if we compare his different accounts of this happening he
states at one point that it happened on the road by a man who approached
him, but another of his accounts claims he was on the wharf at Nauvoo
unloading cargo from a boat.

Jackson never discovered for certain who had tried to kill him, but he
believed that it had been done on orders from Joseph Smith. The Mormons
in Nauvoo were skeptical of any outsiders and late 1842 was an exciting
time for the kingdom on the Mississippi. However, just because somebody
was a stranger to the city didn’t warrant them being assassinated by a
Danite. If this assassination attempt did indeed happen, there’s more to
the story that Jackson isn’t telling us. Nauvoo understandably had
gotten a little hot for him, so he fled the city and spent the winter in
nearby Carthage,
Illinois.[<u>\[3\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn3)

There are some interesting Nauvoo court records from November 1842 that
confirm Jackson’s story that he was in Nauvoo at the time. Jackson’s
role in this story was pretty minor, but I think the story is worth
telling because it illustrates how Joseph Smith had perverted the
justice system in Nauvoo to be his own little banana republic court. The
story concerns the case of City of Nauvoo vs. Amos Davis, and it begins
on November 25<sup>th</sup>, when a non-Mormon named Amos Davis said
some “abusive” or “depreciatory” things about Joseph Smith. We don’t
know exactly what it was that he said, as is the case with almost all of
these cases Jo filed, but on November 29, the City of Nauvoo charged
Davis with violating the city’s “ordinance in relation to religious
societies.” According to the ordinance, “should any person be guilty of
ridiculing\[,\] abusing, or otherwise depreciating another in
consequence of his religion\[,\] . . . he shall on conviction thereof,
\[. . .\] be considered a disturber of the public peace, and fined in
any Sum not exceeding five hundred Dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding
six months, or both at the discretion of said Mayor, or Court.” Joseph
Smith, who in addition to being mayor was also the city prosecutor, of
course, considered Davis’s remarks to be a violation of the law and he
was
fined.[<u>\[4\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn4)

The court issued subpoenas for several witnesses, including Joseph H.
Jackson.[<u>\[5\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn5)
Jackson appeared before the court on November 30 to testify in the case
as a witness for the prosecution. Chauncey Higbee served as attorney for
the defendant, and George P. Stiles served as attorney for the
prosecution. The case was judged by the Nauvoo city council, with
William Marks as president pro tem. Unfortunately we have no record of
what exactly the witnesses said. What we do know is that the defense
attorney Chauncey Higbee argued that the prosecution had presented no
evidence of a violation of the city ordinance, and that the case should
be dismissed. “Joseph Smith the Prosecutor for the City, spoke at
considerable length, by permission of the Court,” but the aldermen
agreed with Higbee and ruled in favor of the defendant, with court costs
to be paid by the
plaintiff.[<u>\[6\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn6)

That was not the end of it, however. Joseph Smith wasn’t satisfied with
the city council’s judgment, so he had the case retried. There are two
docket records for this case. One version records the proceedings from
November 30 and the court’s ruling in favor of the defendant. The second
version *completely omits* the proceedings from November 30, as if they
never happened. In this version, the trial was held on December 3. It
seems like some of the aldermen wanted nothing to do with the retrial,
because subpoenas were issued to all the aldermen to “enforce” their
attendance as judges in the case. Aldermen Daniel Spencer and Gustavus
Hills didn’t show up and had to be brought in by the city marshal, Henry
G. Sherwood. Joseph H. Jackson was again subpoenaed as a witness, but
this time he didn’t show up to testify, perhaps because he had left the
city and gone to Carthage sometime between November 30 and December 3.
This time around, the court ruled in favor of the prosecution and fined
the defendant $50 and full costs of suit, under threat of six months
imprisonment if he refused to pay the fine. It also put him under a $200
bond to guarantee his good behavior for the next six
months.[<u>\[7\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn7)

Amos Davis appealed this case to the circuit court at Carthage, and on
January 19, 1843, that court ordered the city of Nauvoo to “suspend all
proceedings” in relation to the case and ordered “that the record &
proceedings in said Cause \[i.e., Case\] be Certified to said Circuit
Court, & to be in no wise omitted, at peril.” In other words, forward us
the full record of the case, without omitting the proceedings from
November
30.[<u>\[8\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn8)
Well, guess what? On February 17, Nauvoo court clerk James Sloan
forwarded to Carthage edited version of the docket record, with the
proceedings from November 30 completely omitted. At the bottom of the
trial record, he perjured himself by writing, “I James Sloan Clerk of
the Municipal Court, within and for the said City, do hereby Certify
that the foregoing is a true Copy from my docket, of the proceedings and
Judgment in the above Case, and that the said transcript and papers
contain a full and perfect statement of all the proceedings before said
Court in said
case.”[<u>\[9\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftn9)
So that gives you a pretty clear idea of what passed for a justice
system in the city of Nauvoo. We’ve talked about it a lot on the show,
it was Jo’s little personal court that would do whatever he wanted.
Witnesses would be produced and justice was never served.

During this Amos Davis debacle, Joseph Jackson apparently spent the
winter of 1842-43 in Carthage, Illinois, stewing on the Mormon attempt
to assassinate him. He was certain that Joseph Smith himself was behind
the assassination attempt, and he vowed revenge on the Mormon leader. He
returned to Nauvoo in spring 1843 intending to infiltrate Joseph Smith’s
inner circle, collect evidence on Smith’s villainy, and expose him to an
officer of the law so he could be brought to justice. At least, that’s
Jackson’s version of what happened.

Historian Kathleen Melanokos suggests an alternate possibility.
According to Melanokos, “It seems likely that Jackson was a
counterfeiter himself, for two reasons. First, he would later be named
on the 1845 federal indictments for counterfeiting with other Nauvoo
counterfeiters. Secondly, in his pamphlet, he described intimate
familiarity with the deceptive methods of counterfeiters. … It is
possible that Jackson went to Nauvoo specifically to engage in the bogus
business, and only turned state’s evidence when it became expedient.” In
other words, his friendship with Joseph may initially have been genuine
rather than just a pose, as Jackson later claimed.

There are many ways to look at Jackson and his affiliation with the
church. Joseph Smith and the refugee Mormon settlement attracted people
like Joseph Jackson, an amoral opportunist. Did he actually join the
Mormon settlement to expose Joseph Smith? Did he just do it after he saw
how successfully John Bennett’s expose had sold in the second half of
1842? Did he join just to see what keys of ascendency may be unlocked to
him once he gave loyalty to the prophet? Maybe he was just a grifter and
the new Mormon settlement was his newest set of dupes he drifted toward.

Jackson was well aware that people might doubt his story about having
intended all along to expose Joseph Smith, so he included in his expose,
which we’ll discuss in a minute, an affidavit from Hancock County
sheriff Harmon T. Wilson, which says that Jackson told him in the winter
of 1842-1843 about his plan to infiltrate Joseph Smith’s circle and
bring Smith to justice. Several private citizens also provided
affidavits to the same effect. So that goes a long way to support
Jackson’s story about his motivations.

However, it could also be construed as Jackson providing a possible way
out. I mean, if he joined his wagon to the Mormon train and everything
went sour, he could publish his expose and claim that was his motivation
all along, but if Mormonism rose to the aspirations the leadership
calculated, then Jackson could have become yet another trusted advisor
of the prophet and anything he said to Sheriff Harmon Wilson or anybody
else about exposing Joseph Smith would be forgotten. His deeds, or
misdeeds, while affiliated with the Mormons, including manufacturing
bogus, would never be brought to justice.

Whatever the case may have been, Jackson remains rather enigmatic a
figure in Nauvoo history and his real intentions can never be solidly
known, meaning his name can easily be cast in both negative and positive
light to create competing narratives of his time in Mormonism.
Unfortunately for all of us trying to figure out this guy, his actions
leave his motivations up to interpretation. For example, back on episode
171, we talked about Daniel and his son, Philander, Avery being arrested
in Illinois and being extradited to Missouri to answer for their crimes.
The Mormons feared that this was a predictor of what the sheriffs would
do if they ever got their hands on Joseph Smith so the city passed new
ordinances to arrest any officer who enters Nauvoo for the purposes of
arresting somebody in the city. The father-son Avery combination spent a
few weeks in a Missouri prison just over the border from Warsaw awaiting
their trial. If Daniel Avery stood trial in Missouri it would reveal a
lot of information about Danites and robbery along the Mississippi. Jo
didn’t want that to happen. Philander Avery escaped prison and told Jo
what the state if Missouri had planned for his father, Daniel. Jo acted
by calling on Joseph H. Jackson to interfere with the scheduled hearing
in whatever way possible.

This happened in late December 1843. Philander Avery told Jo that a
former Danite named Ebenezer Richardson and a young boy from Montrose
named Mark Childs were to be witnesses at Daniel Avery’s trial.
According to Joseph Jackson, “Joe selected several of his Danite Band”
to kidnap the witnesses, “and placed Capt. \[Jonathan\] Dunham at the
head.” Dunham was accompanied by fellow soon-to-be-policemen Hosea
Stout, Abraham O. Smoot, and Daniel Carn; senior warden of the Nauvoo
Masonic lodge Lucius Scovil; and former Missouri Danite captain Reynolds
Cahoon. Jackson was ordered to go along as a test of his loyalty. If the
witnesses couldn’t be brought alive, they were to be killed and their
bodies dumped in a ravine. If they were successfully brought to Nauvoo,
“the order of Joe was to tie an iron bar to his \[Richardson’s\]
shoulders, and throw him into the Mississippi for catfish food.” The
expedition, however, went awry when a Gentile posse intercepted the
Mormons as they were transporting their prisoners back to Nauvoo. There
was an altercation, and the Mormon enforcers narrowly escaped back
across the river. They were met by Joseph Smith on the other side. “On
arriving there, we found Joe partially dressed, wrapped in his mantle.
He had heard the report of guns on the other side, and had got up at
this early hour, which was for him very unusual, to see what had
happened.”\[9\] We can date this event because Joseph reported it in his
journal: “About one o’clock in the morning I was alarmed by the firing
of a gun, got up, and went down to the river bank to see the guard, and
inquire the cause of it. To my surprise, they had not heard it, although
I felt sure it was fired in Montrose. The morning proved it to be
correct, some rowdies in Montrose had been firing in the night.”\[10\]
The gunshot was actually friendly fire as the former-Danite, Richardson,
assumed the men were there to kill him instead of kidnapping him and he
shot one of them in the arm. According to Governor Thomas Ford in his
History of Illinois, “It was sufficiently proved in a proceeding at
Carthage, whilst I was there, that Joe Smith had sent a band of his
followers to Missouri, to kidnap two men, who were witnesses against a
member of his church, then in jail, and about to be tried on a charge of
larceny.”\[12\]

Being trusted enough by the prophet to help his Danites to carry out a
kidnapping mission to keep witnesses from providing evidence in a court
of law means Joseph Jackson was very well-trusted by Joseph Smith for at
least most of 1843. I mean, it’s sleazy and low, but Jackson and Jo were
kindred spirits in many ways. Jo tested Jackson’s loyalty multiple times
by giving him illegal missions like this. The first was to break Pistol
Packin’ Porter Rockwell out of the Missouri prison; kidnapping this man
and child was another. Apparently Jackson passed the test because they
were successfully sequestered in Nauvoo and failed to testify at the
trial. A few days later, according to Jackson anyway, Jo and Jackson had
another meeting, this time concerning a growing trouble that would lead
to the Expositor in June of 1844, but this meeting was in late December
1843.

> “Joe and I had a long talk concerning Law, in which he avowed . . .
> his determination to put Law out of the way\[.\] . . . He then
> determined on calling out the police, as it was publicly called but
> Danites in private\[.\] . . . He determined to keep forty of them on
> duty, (twenty at a time) under pay of the city. The reason for this
> proceeding as given to the people, was, that he thought it necessary
> to have a city watch; but the real object as disclosed to me, was, to
> murder his enemies. . . . Not only was his design to remove William
> Law, but also William Marks \[whose daughter had told her parents of
> attempted seduction by Joseph\]. . . . Now said he, ‘I will work it
> this way: I will keep twenty on watch under the command of Capt.
> Dunham, who will select five to do the work, and these men will both
> be missing, and then I’ll make a great noise about it, and call it
> persecutions\[.’\] ‘Now,’ said he, ‘aint’ this a d--d good plan to get
> rid of traitors?’ . . . He then said that he intended to keep up this
> watch until he had rid the city of his enemies, and there were some in
> the country whom he also intended should go by the board. He said that
> the church had already suffered enough from persecutors, and that he
> would submit no longer -- men must cease their persecutions, or he
> would give them a dose that would stop them.” Jackson spoke in
> opposition to the plan. “Joe accused me of tying his hands, and said
> that he could do nothing if opposed.”

It's hard to tease out the truth in this portion of Jackson’s expose.
Did the meeting actually happen? Did he really oppose Jo’s plans? Did Jo
actually tell Jackson that he was tying his hands by opposing the
assassination of William Law? Was Jo just telling this to Jackson to
test his loyalty again? We simply have no way of telling exactly what
happened. Lending credibility to Jackson’s version of the story, Jo did
organize a platoon of the Danites under the direction of Jonathan Dunham
to be sworn in as officers of the city. In conjunction with this was
Jo’s unofficial army of young men soldiers, the whistling and
whittling brigade. These were the young men who would sit on street
corners in downtown Nauvoo and keep watch on anybody walking through the
city. If there was somebody they didn’t recognize, they were to collect
as much information as they could and funnel it back to the prophet. If
he gave the order, they’d surround the person while whistling and
whittling sticks with their bowie knives as intimidation. This is how
criminal empires work.

These policemen patrolled Nauvoo and fed everything they knew back to
the criminal kingpin himself. It’s at this point that Jackson may have
tried to dabble on both sides of the veil. Somebody notified William Law
that Jo was plotting to kill him. Law brought the case up in court in
early January 1844. We discussed this back on episode 178 about William
Judas Law when Jo named a “Brutus or a Judas” within his ranks. Jo
intimidated William Law on the stand at the Nauvoo Municipal Court
hearing, and Law initially refused to talk. Eventually Law bowed to the
power of the tyrant and told the tribunal that a man named Eli Norton
had told him about the assassination attempt against his life. Norton
wasn’t a member of the newly-commissioned Nauvoo Police force, but he
was friends with a guy named Daniel Carn who was. Apparently, Eli Norton
learned about the assassination plot from Daniel Carn, who was supposed
to be one of the guys who tied the stick to Law’s shoulders to turn him
into catfish food.

During the hearing, William Law said just enough to get him out of the
situation. However, he and his brother, Wilson, confronted Joseph Smith
2 days later in the presence of Jackson who reported the confrontation
in his expose.

> Joseph “became very angry that any should have any fears or suspect
> that he would encourage such a thing, and said that he had a good mind
> to put them (the police) on us anyhow, we were such fools, or words to
> that effect.” This remark infuriated the Laws and “some hard words
> passed between us\[.\]”\[21\] According to Joseph Jackson, Smith’s
> remark “so exasperated Wilson Law, that he drew his pistol, and made
> Joe swallow his words in a hurry. So great was the excitement, that it
> was with difficulty that William Law and Hyrum Smith, could prevent
> Wilson from firing.”

Wilson Law nearly shot Jo in January of 1844, Charles Foster nearly shot
Jo only 3 months later. Joseph Smith knew how to make enemies.
Throughout the growing tensions between Jo and the Laws, Joseph H.
Jackson was actually inducted into the city police force, meaning the
Danite squad tasked with patrolling the city for anybody who may oppose
the prophet. Notably, some Mormon historians like Brian Hales will claim
that within only a week of Jo and Jackson meeting that their friendship
had suffered irreparable damage and they were growing enemies beginning
sometime in spring of 1843. That isn’t the case. Jackson was elevated to
higher and higher levels of trust and loyalty in Mormonism throughout
all of 1843 and early 1844. Jackson was also probably feeding
information to the Laws as they grew to be public enemies \#1 of the
prophet. Jackson hedged his bets and tried to play on all sides of the
growing conflict. As of late January 1844, Jackson was referred to as
Colonel Jackson by Joseph Smith in his journal.

However, it may be the case that Jo was smart enough to keep his friends
close and enemies closer, and by elevating Jackson to the Nauvoo police
force could keep closer tabs on him. By late February 1844, according to
Jackson anyway, Jo had conceived of a plan to get rid of Jackson. This
was recorded as part of Jackson’s expose without any other corroborating
documents, but apparently Jo orchestrated a scenario in the Quorum of
Apostles to get rid of Jackson and make it look like an accident common
of frontier American life.

The Twelve met “according to Joseph Council” to discuss “selecting a
company to explore Oregon and California, and select a site for a new
city for the Saints.” Dunham and Phineas Young volunteered to go. Among
the others selected were James Emmett and Daniel Spencer. (See also
entries for February 23, 1844 and August 4, 1845.)\[27\] Joseph H.
Jackson claimed he was warned by “a certain lady . . . who had heard
Joe, Hyrum, and Dr. Richards in conversation” that the sole purpose of
this expedition was to have Jackson killed. He was to be put in charge
of it (as a former resident of California). The company would “get
started, and \[the Danites would\] kill me; and then \[the company
would\] return \[to Nauvoo\] and report that the Indians had shot their
pilot, and they were obliged to return. . . . \[A\]s soon as I refused
to go to California, the whole matter dropt, and I heard no more of the
expedition.”

Understandably, when Jackson learned of the plot to kill him hatched by
the prophet and Quorum of Apostles, that was his point of no return. He
knew Nauvoo was coming to a breaking point and if the rumors of his past
life before Nauvoo are any indicator, he had quite a drive for
self-preservation and could recognize when situations were getting out
of control. Notably as well, Jackson wasn’t inducted into the Council of
Fifty, which was formed of the most-trusted elites just half a month
after the plan to kill him was formed. A person like Jackson rising
through the ranks of the Mormon kingdom, we’d expect to see him inducted
into the super-secretive society, but his absence reveals skepticism of
his loyalty by the prophet.

This skepticism seems to have run both directions. Jo was skeptical of
Jackson but Jackson knew all along that Jo couldn’t be trusted and it
was around this time that Jackson likely began devising his exit
strategy, possibly in collusion with the Laws, Fosters, and Higbees who
were all devising their own strategies. Look, the Fosters Higbees and
Laws were never good friends with Joseph H. Jackson, but it seems like
one of those enemy of my enemy situations here. By late March, Jo
preached on the stand that there was a plot to kill him.

> I have been informed by two gentlemen that a conspiracy is got up in
> this place for the purpose of taking the life of President Joseph
> Smith, his family, and all the Smith family, and the heads of the
> Church. . . . The names of the persons revealed at the head of the
> conspiracy are as follows:—Chancey L. Higbee, Dr. Robert D. Foster,
> Mr. Joseph H. Jackson, William and Wilson Law. And the lies that C. L.
> Higbee has hatched up as a foundation to work upon are—he says that I
> had men's heads cut off in Missouri, and that I had a sword run
> through the hearts of the people that I wanted to kill and put out of
> the way. I won't swear out a warrant against them, for I don't fear
> any of them: they would not scare off an old setting hen. I intend to
> publish all the iniquity that I know of them. If I am guilty, I am
> ready to bear it. There is sometimes honor among enemies.

With Jackson named among the enemies who would publish the prospectus of
the Nauvoo Expositor only barely a month after this screed, he was
officially marked. However, there are some interesting details in
Jackson’s expose which merit mentioning. It’s clear to me that Jackson
counted some members of the Council of Fifty as friends and was able to
get information from them even if he himself wasn’t allowed to attend
the meetings. This data to which I’m referring strikes at some of Jo’s
greatest ambitions of global domination.

On March 14<sup>th</sup>, the second meeting of the Council of Fifty, a
guy named Uriah Brown was inducted into the Council. Uriah Brown was a
non-Mormon, one of only 2 members of the Council of Fifty who weren’t
actually Mormons. Uriah Brown was an inventor who had an offer for Jo’s
Mormon theocracy revolution. We discussed this back on episode 71 when
we had Tom and Cecil from Cognitive Dissonance podcast on the show to
talk about the worst POTUS candidate ever. I’m going to read a pretty
large chunk and this is straight from a footnote of the Council of Fifty
Minutes on the Joseph Smith Papers Project.

> “\[Uriah\] Brown was a non-Mormon friend of JS and the first of three
> non-Mormons added to the Council of Fifty in 1844. JS explained that
> these men had been included to demonstrate that the kingdom of God
> operated on “the broad and liberal principal that all men have equal
> rights,” regardless of religious denomination. During the War of 1812,
> Brown had invented a naval weapon—described as “Greek fire”—that would
> propel liquid fire at enemy ships. The weapon had elicited occasional
> interest by the U.S. government. It is unclear whether Brown’s weapon
> influenced JS’s decision to add him to the council. In January 1843 JS
> reviewed plans for the weapon with Brown and informed him that “he had
> thought that the Lord had designd the apparatus for some more
> magnificnt purpose than for the defence of nations.” Joseph H.
> Jackson, an enemy of JS, later claimed that JS persuaded Brown to
> attempt to sell the weapon to Russia while secretly planning to use
> the weapon as a bartering tool to negotiate an alliance with the
> Russian emperor. However, there is no discussion of the weapon in the
> council record during the Nauvoo era and scant discussion elsewhere,
> so the reliability of Jackson’s accusation is difficult to assess. In
> 1851 the Council of Fifty discussed an offer by Brown, who had been
> dropped by the council in 1845, to sell the weapon to Brigham Young so
> that it could be used to defend Mormon settlements in the Great Basin.
> During that discussion, Almon Babbitt identified the weapon with “the
> Russian mission.” Babbitt also recalled JS’s “favorable reception
> \[of\] the invention” and stated that he was “in favor of carrying out
> the views of Joseph and thinks it a matter worthy of our notice,”
> though neither Babbitt nor anyone else at the 1851 meeting indicated
> what JS’s intentions may have been for the weapon. (Council of Fifty,
> “Record,” 11 Apr. 1844; JS, Journal, 8 Jan. 1843; Jackson,
> Narrative, 30; Minutes, 25 Aug. 1851, Council of Fifty, Papers,
> 1845–1883, CHL.)”

That’s on their own website. That’s straight from the Joseph Smith
Papers site linked in the show notes. According to Joseph H. Jackson’s
expose, Jo added Uriah Brown to the Council of Fifty because he had
devised plans to construct a submarine with a flamethrower mounted on it
which he wanted to sell to Russia in order to gain credibility with the
czar and overthrow the American government. The fact that this weapon
system isn’t recorded in any Nauvoo meeting minutes of even the most
secretive councils and only later alluded to by the Utah Territory
presidency under Bloody Brigham Young illustrates to us that there were
plans much greater than available documents reveal. We only learn of
this Russia collusion and weapon of mass destruction plan from Jackson
which leads most historians to regard it as bunk, but the fact that
Bloody Brigham approached Uriah Brown half a decade after Jo’s death to
inquire about the availability of the weapon system is evidence enough
for me that such a plan was in place and Jackson had access to those
plans without being able to attend the council meetings himself.

Jackson was continuing to play all sides of the rising conflict though.
According to Jo’s mom, Lucy Mack Smith, her biographical sketches
discuss Jackson as an enemy of her two sons and the larger church. While
she’s not very solid on dates in her reminiscences, we can nail down a
rough date of March 1844 when the described event transpired. According
to Lucy, Joseph H. Jackson took a bit of a shining to Hyrum
Sidekick-Abiff’s daughter, Lovina, who was a teenager at the time.

> “About this time, a man by the name of Joseph Jackson, who been had
> been in the place several months, became enamored of Hyrum’s Miss
> Lovina Smith, Hyrum’s oldest daughter, and asked her father’s
> permission to marry her. Being refused, he went and requested Joseph
> to use his influence in his (Jackson’s) favor. This Joseph refused to
> do. He next applied to Law (who was our secret enemy) for assistance
> in stealing Lovina from her father; and from this time forth,
> continued seeking out our enemies till he succeeded in getting a
> number to join him in a conspiracy to murder the whole Smith family:
> they commenced holding secret meetings; one of which was attended by a
> man named Eaton, who was our friend, and he exposed the plot. This man
> declared that the Higbees, Laws, and Fosters, were all connected with
> Jackson in his opperations; there was also another individual named
> Augustine Spencer:— a disolute chaaracter, although a member of an
> excelent family, \[p. 308\] — who, I believe, was concerned in this
> conspiracy. About the time of Eaton’s disclosures, this Mr. Spencer
> went to the house of his brother Orson \[Spencer\], and abused my Sons
> and the church at such a rate, that Orson finally told him that he
> must either stop or leave the house. Augustine refused— and they
> grappled. In the contest Orson was considerably injured. He went
> immediately to Joseph’s, and stating the case, asked for a warrant.
> Joseph advised him to go to Dr \[Robert D.\] Foster; who was Justice
> of the peace. He therefore went and demanded a warrant of Foster; but
> was refused. For this refusal, Foster was brought before Esq \[Daniel
> H.\] Wells, and tried for nonperformance of duty. At this trial Joseph
> met Charles Foster, the Doctor’s brother, who attempted to shoot
> Joseph, as soon as they met; but was prevented by Joseph’s catching
> his hands, and holding him by main force, and in this way he was
> compelled to confine him above an hour in order to preserve his own
> life. Jackson and the apostates continued to gather strength till
> finally they established a printing press in our midst. Through this
> organ they belched forth the most intolerable, and blackest lies that
> was ever palmed upon a community. The city council, being advised by
> men of influence and standing to have this scandelous press removed,
> took the matter into consideration; and finding that the law would
> allow them to do so, they declared it a nuisance, and had it treated
> accordingly. At this the apostates left the city in a great rage, \[p.
> 309\] swearing vengeance against Joseph, and the city council; and, in
> fact, the whole city. They went forthwith to Carthage, and swore out
> writs for Joseph, and all those who were in any wise concerned in the
> destruction of the press. But having no hopes of Justice in that
> place, the bretheren took out a writ of habeas corpus, and were tried
> before Esq Wells \[an\] in Nauvoo. With this the apostates were not
> satisfied: they then called upon one Levi Williams, who was a bitter
> enemy to us, whenever he was sufficiently sober to know his own
> sentiments; for he is drunken, illiterate, ignorant brute, that never
> had a particle of character or influence, until he began to call mob
> meetings, and placed himself at the head of a rabble like unto himself
> to drive the Mormons; when he was joined by certain unmentionable ones
> in Warsaw and Carthage; and, for his zeal in promoting mobocracy, he
> became the intimate acquaintance, and confidential friend of some
> certain preachers, lawyers, doctors, Squires, and representatives; and
> finally of Joseph Jackson and the apostates: and now as Col. Levi
> Williams, he commands the Militia (alias mob) of Hancock county:— On
> this man I say they called for assistance to drag Joseph and Hyrum,
> with the rest of the council to Carthage. Williams swore it should be
> done; and gathered his band together. Joseph, not choosing to fall
> into the hands of wolves or tigers, called upon the Legion to be in
> readiness to defend the city and its Chartered rights.”

Lucy gets us to the exact location our timeline currently rests, in June
of 1844 with Jo calling out the Nauvoo Legion to answer for the riot
caused by burning the printing press of the Nauvoo Expositor. I want to
tease out a few details from Lucy’s account though because they’re
important and she sort of glossed over them. She claims Jackson was the
head of the band of anti-Mormons in the city which was comprised of the
Fosters, Higbees, and Laws. Jackson, however, was never named as one of
the publishers of the Nauvoo Expositor. He was a man who had a certain
particular relationship with the English language which could have been
for the Expositor’s benefit, but he wasn’t named in the prospectus or
the Expositor itself at any point, nor is he attributed anywhere in the
paper as a source of information about the outrages the Expositor
reports. Jackson would never choose to be a silent partner in such an
endeavor as he was a man who glorified in his own infamy. Unless,
however, he was still trying to play all sides of the conflict and the
Laws, Fosters, and Higbees regarded him as not trustworthy enough to be
part of their clan.

Notably as well, Lucy talked about Charles Foster pulling a pistol on
Joseph Smith when he, his brother Robert, and William Law refused to aid
the city marshal in arresting Augustine Spencer. However, Lucy said it
was her son who parried the gun and disarmed Wilson. However, Jo’s
journal says it was Robert Foster who removed the pistol from him.
Another statement to the facts claimed it was Pistol Packin’ Porter who
disarmed and subdued Charles. Memory is a fickle thing, especially when
moms are telling the world about their little angels who could do no
wrong.

Also the concept that Jackson was after Hyrum’s daughter is quite
striking. Her claim that he went to Joseph to get his help in soliciting
Hyrum’s daughter for a plural wife means that even in March of 1844 he
felt comfortable enough around Jo to make such a request while he was
simultaneously meeting with the Fosters, Higbees, and Laws. It just
looks like the guy was hedging his bets in all directions with the
expectation he could jump on whichever ship wasn’t sinking at a moment’s
notice.

Oddly enough, as evidence of the fact Jackson was playing both sides, we
find out from the History of the Church, that it was actually Jackson
who told M. G. Eaton about the plot to assassinate Jo by the Fosters,
Higbees, and Laws. According to an affidavit filed on March 27, 1844 by
Abiathar B. Williams:

> During the time we were walking, said Joseph H. Jackson said that he
> was then coming direct from Mr. Law's; that there was going to be a
> secret meeting in the city of Nauvoo, probably tomorrow evening: but,
> as it was not decided, he could not say positively as to the time; but
> he would inform me in season. The said Joseph H. Jackson said that
> Doctor Foster, Chauncey L. Higbee, and the Laws were red hot for a
> conspiracy, and he should not be surprised if in two weeks there
> should not be one of the Smith family left alive in Nauvoo. After we
> arrived at Mr. Loomis', near the Masonic hall, in the city of Nauvoo,
> he related some things which he stated that Dr. Foster had said
> relative to his family. This he did in the presence of Mr. Eaton and
> myself, and strongly solicited myself and Mr. Eaton to attend the
> secret meeting and join them in their intentions.

Jo had stated in his March 24<sup>th</sup> sermon that Jackson was named
among those who was trying to get up the plot, yet he also funneled that
information to a Jo crony, M.G. Eaton, who then fed that information
back to Jo. The reasoning provided by Eaton that Jackson used for
telling him about the plot was to tell Eaton to jump ship because it’s
asinkin’, the city’s on fire, and in two weeks every Smith will be dead.
What’s incredibly fascinating about all of this is that M.G. Eaton was a
friend of Jackson’s in the bogus business. He’d previously lived in New
York but fled the state on counterfeiting charges. MG Eaton, Peter Haws,
and Joseph Jackson were three of the primary bogus coin makers in Nauvoo
and across the Mississippi in the Mormon settlement in Iowa.

However, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith didn’t believe that the Laws were
conspiring with Jackson, he instead laid the conspiracy to kill Jo and
the whole Smith family at the feet of Jackson. “Messrs. Laws have done a
great deal of good & when we can see any thing in the conspiracy it was
presumed that the rascal Jackson who presumed upon them. & I do not
believe that the Messrs. Laws would do any thing against me—it was the
rascal Jackson who did it—he did it & I wo\[ul\]d. not believe Jackson
if he was to swear on a Stack of Bibles as big as Mount Etna”. Does the
size of the stack of bibles make the swearer more true? Like if the
stack Jackson swore on was as Big as the Himalayas would you believe
him? What if the stack was as big as the moon? Is an oath on one of
those bible passages painted on a grain of rice automatically false?
Whatever.

Soon after Hyrum made this speech in the High Council at Nauvoo, he
received an anonymous letter on May 12. “supposed to have been written
by Joseph H. Jackson, threatening his life, and calling upon him to make
his peace with God for he would soon have to die.” The letter itself is
no longer extant so we can’t tell if it is indeed Jackson who wrote it
or what it said, but it seems plausible. This was on May
12<sup>th</sup>, 2 days after the prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor had
been printed and it seems Jackson was ready to hitch his wagon to the
dissenter party.

For the remainder of May and June 1844, Jackson seems to bounce back and
forth between Carthage and Nauvoo quite a bit. In late May Jo took a
posse of Danites with him to Carthage to testify to his character, only
a week and a half before the Expositor was published. They stopped for
the night at Hamilton’s hotel where they found Charles Foster and Jo
talked with him for a while. “I had considerable conversation with
\[Charles Foster\], and he appeared to be more mild than previously, and
as though he was almost persuaded that he had been influenced to some
extent by false reports.” We know that is an inaccurate account of the
conversation which transpired because this is the Foster who’d pointed a
double-barreled pistol at Jo only a month before. But then Jo reports
the information Foster told him. “that there were some persons who were
determined I should not go out of Carthage alive. Jackson was seen to
reload his pistols, and was heard to swear he would have satisfaction of
me and Hyrum.” And indeed, when Jo, Hyrum, and their Danite posse left
Carthage to return to Nauvoo on May 28<sup>th</sup>, “there were many
people about in small groups. Jackson stood on the green with one or two
men some distance off.” They couldn’t strike because the tyrant was
surrounded by his underground bank of shadow enforcers. It was a suicide
mission to strike then and there.

Instead, Jackson chose to assassinate the prophet with an expose he
wrote and published in the Warsaw Signal 4 days later. There was a
problem with Jackson trying to play all sides of the conflict because
he’d lost credibility with all sides. The Expositor publishers didn’t
want anything to do with him. People he considered his secret allies fed
his confidential information back to the prophet. He’d become an enemy
of the prophet and couldn’t get himself a wife of the patriarch’s oldest
daughter. He was generally distrusted by everybody with whom he’d shared
time and correspondence for the past 2 years of his life. However, just
because he wasn’t trustworthy doesn’t mean he couldn’t be used by the
anti-Mormon group to turn up the heat on the prophet. He wrote his
expose for the Warsaw Signal which turned up the heat and in some ways
set the stage for the Nauvoo Expositor, published only a week later, to
have greater impact.

STARTLING  DISCLOSURES.

>                                                         Carthage, June
> 1, 1844.  
> Mr. Editor: --  
>   
> Having been a short time since a rather conspicuous character in this
> community, on account of my connection with Joseph, I am anxious to
> convey to the public through your columns, the motives that actuate my
> conduct, and thus clear away false impressions which my former conduct
> has tended to produce. In hopes that the following plain statement of
> facts, which can be substantiated by unquestionable testimony will
> produce this effect, I submit it for the information of your
> readers.  
>   
> In the fall of 1842, I visited Nauvoo and although I have no knowledge
> of having done any thing which should have aroused suspicion, I was
> informed that I was regarded with distrust by his holiness and marked
> down accordingly as a spy. A short time after this, I had proof that
> this information was authentic; for incontestable evidence was given
> of the hostile designs of Joe towards me.  
>   
> One evening after dark, as I was riding in a wagon with a friend, we
> met another wagon coming from an opposite direction. A voice from the
> latter cried out as we passed, "Jackson is that you," I answered in
> the affirmative. "I wish to see you," said the stranger. I got out of
> the wagon, and walked to meet the individual who accosted me, who had
> also left the wagon in which he road. The wagons passed on and we
> neared each other, when suddenly the stranger fired a pistol -- the
> ball whizzed by my head, and the assassin fled. I saw no more of him;
> but the effect of this incident was to make me resolve to be avenged,
> if the cunning of man could accomplish what I so much desired. I saw
> plainly from what I had heard, that Joe Smith was the instigator of
> the villain who attempted to take my life without provocation, and I
> thought to myself that it should not be my fault, if he were not made
> to smart for his villainy.  
>   
> Shortly after this I quit Nauvoo, and spent the winter in Carthage. In
> the spring of 1843 I told Harmon T. Wilson, that I was determined to
> head Joe and in order to do so that I would go to Nauvoo, insinuate
> myself into his favor, win his affection and confidence, and that if
> he really was a villain I would find it out, and at a proper season I
> would disclose all to him, that as an officer of the law, he might
> have an opportunity to bring the scamp to justice. Accordingly I
> returned to Nauvoo I sought Joe's favor -- he protested he was a man
> of God: I told him I knew his heart, that his religion was a humbug
> and I wanted to hear none of it. I represented myself as an outlaw and
> fugitive from justice -- ready to do whatever he commanded. For a long
> time, he persisted in his professions of holiness, but finally seeing
> that I was not gullible enough to believe his \[sanctified\]
> professions, and having succeeded in making him believe that I was a
> proper tool for his uses, he gave in, and acknowledged to me his
> proper character and principles. He admitted himself an atheist, and
> the. Book of Mormon a humbug;- and that the original was written by
> Lyman Spalding, whose heirs now have it in their possession.  
>   
> By degrees, I entwine, myself completely into his confidence. I seemed
> ready to perform whatever I was commanded, and to the world kept up
> the appearance that I was in reality what I seemed to be. I succeeded
> in my object -- every plot, every plan, every secret movement of the
> villainous system by which Joe deludes and strips his followers, was
> made known to me; and before God I say, that a more detestable
> miscreant treads not the earth. Steeped in blood and crime, guilty by
> his own admissions, of almost every act of wickedness, that the
> machinations of hell can suggest to mortal man, he stands before the
> Devil, but even as the rival of his Satanic Majesty.  
>   
> But the limits of this communication will not allow me to
> particularize; suffice it to say, that Joe disclosed to me while in
> his confidence, that he did send O. P. Rockwell to Missouri: to
> assassinate Gov. Boggs. He stated too the particulars. I was sent on
> the mission to liberate him after he had been taken. I know all the
> facts in relation to this affair, and will soon disclose them to the
> world. After Rockwell had returned, Joe offered me $3000; if I would
> do what Rockwell had failed to do, to wit: take the life of Boggs. I
> consented; -- I visited Missouri, for the purpose of keeping up
> appearances with him, and on my return excused myself for not having
> done, what I would have shrunk with horror from doing; by telling him
> that Boggs was not at home.  
>   
> This alone brands Joe as an assassin but this is not all I know of his
> murderous purposes. He attempted to hire myself and others, to take
> the life of some of our most valuable citizens. I will not at present
> name them; but I will say from what I know, that his enemies are not
> safe. He has a ruffian band around him ready to execute whatever he
> commands and who are only deterred by the fear of detection. The fact
> that Joe is engaged in counterfeiting, also came to my knowledge while
> in his confidence; besides this, a baser and more unscrupulous seducer
> lives not -- I could name his victims, but regard for their feelings
> deter me.  
>   
> The limits I have prescribed for this communication, compels me to
> desist from further remarks at this time. I know that my life is
> sought by Joe; but I also know, that should I be suddenly cut off, my
> death will be attributed to the proper source, and amply revenged. I
> have said enough already, to convince the world that while in Nauvoo
> my motive was not that which was then attributed to me. -- The fact
> that I made known to H. T. Wilson my object in going there will unfold
> the mystery of my conduct.  
>                                            Yours Respectfully,  
>                                                            J. H.
> JACKSON.

Here we can see Jackson’s way of writing his expose. This wasn’t his
full-length pamphlet expose, that wouldn’t be published until August of
1844, a little late for what it contained about Joseph Smith because the
dude was already dead, but this was the first of his exposes and we can
see how he tries to remove any wrongdoing on his part. He does this with
the reasoning that he needs to explain his conduct and justify why
everybody hates him. Then he tells truths about Jo mixed with probably
falsehoods. He claims Jo told him outright that he was an atheist, a
slur of the day and still to some extent today, and that he admitted the
Book of Mormon was written by Lyman Spalding, also known as Solomon
Spalding, whose heirs now hold the manuscript. Yeah I think I’m safe in
saying this was just a lie. Jo kept a lot of secrets even though he was
quite a talker. To let Jackson in so quickly after so recently being
burned by Wreck-it Bennett just strains credulity. Then Jackson becoming
aware that bogus making was going on? He was literally one of the 3 guys
running the operation\! He didn’t become aware of it to the same extent
that I became aware this week that I do a podcast. His whole life was
marked by counterfeit and finding the Mormons a recipient population to
counterfeit was a fish jumping out of a lake into an ocean. The female
victims he refuses to name who’d become prey of the prophet? Yeah he was
probably just as horrible with women as Joseph Smith. They were kindred
scoundrels in that regard so his sensitive reporting of this sensitive
matter rings hollow to me. Jo offering $3k to Jackson to carry out the
mission that Porter failed is incredibly likely. In Jackson’s August
expose he goes into a lot more detail about what happened there. The
three thousand dollars, likely paid in either inflated land deeds or in
bogus anyway, was a reasonable amount for assassinating a political
opponent. Port got the nicest carriage in town upon his return from his
assassination attempt because Jo knew that to keep loyal followers you
have to keep them comfortable. Then Jackson claiming that Jo hired him
and others to kill other members of their society, that’s the Laws for
sure because Jackson was the one who told William Law that Jo wanted him
dead which allowed William Law to bring a legal complaint against Joseph
Smith. How Jackson chose to wrap the editorial is quite fascinating to
me. If I die, you know who did it. If anybody questions my motive, talk
to Sheriff Harmon T. Wilson who I told about my spy plan before I did
it. This reveals that he legitimately feared for his life.

Look, Jackson was a complicated guy. After he published this and the
Nauvoo Expositor was published, he’d finally declared which side he was
on in this whole affair. Notably, Hyrum Sidekick-Abiff Smith talked
about Jackson extensively during the city council meetings about how to
deal with the Nauvoo Expositor. Hyrum was possibly lying, possibly
telling the truth, it’s tough to know but he told the city council about
Jackson and how horrible of a man he was.

> Mayor said that William Law had offered Jackson $500 to kill him.
> Councilor Hyrum Smith continued—Jackson told him he (Jackson) meant to
> have his daughter, and threatened him if he made any resistance.
> Jackson related to him a dream, that Joseph and Hyrum were opposed to
> him, but that he would execute his purposes; that Jackson had laid a
> plan with four or five persons to kidnap his daughter, and threatened
> to shoot any one that should come near after he had got her in the
> skiff; that Jackson was engaged in trying to make bogus, which was his
> principal business.

Should we trust these accusations about Joseph H. Jackson? Was Jo
telling the truth about William Law trying to hire him to kill the
prophet for $500? Was Hyrum telling the truth about him wanting to
kidnap his daughter? Was Jackson a predator who would take Lovina Smith
against her and her father’s will? Or, were Lovina and Jackson actually
friends or dating but Hyrum didn’t like Jackson and was saving his
oldest daughter to be sealed to somebody else? The truth is, we can’t
trust anything any of these guys said about each other. There may be
some truth in a later statement during the same city council meeting by
Lorenzo Wasson who said “Joseph H. Jackson had told witness that
bogus-making was going on in the city; but it was too damned small
business. Wanted witness to help him to procure money, for the General
(Smith) was afraid to go into it; and with $500 he could get an
engraving for bills on the Bank of Missouri, and one on the State of New
York, and could make money.” Making counterfeit bogus with the Bank of
Missouri stamped into it would have been really helpful for all of
Emma’s supply trips to St. Louis to procure supplies for the Red Brick
Store so of course Jo and Emma were both plugged into the bogus business
as it was probably a primary source of income for both of them. This is
yet another case where any accusations of immoral or illegal behavior
lobbed at Jackson splash damages the prophet and his closest circle.

There’s so much more about Jackson to incorporate into the timeline,
especially as we get through the remainder of June 1844. There was a
confrontation between a Missourian and a Mormon in Carthage and Jackson
stopped the Missourian from killing the Mormon by repeatedly stabbing
him and he figures even more into the eventual assassination at
Carthage. But what do we make of him?

Joseph H. Jackson had a relatively short stint with the Mormons in
Nauvoo. He was so clearly an opportunist and didn’t seem to hold to any
ideology of any sort. His history before Nauvoo is a mystery, he drops
completely from the Mormon radar after his expose following the
assassinations of Jo and Hyrum; he’s an incredibly enigmatic figure.
However, in some ways he followed the same path blazed by opportunists
before him. I can’t help but notice many parallels between him and John
C. Wreck-it Bennett. The primary difference is that it seems Jackson was
at least honest with himself about the fact that he was a scoundrel and
pariah, whereas Bennett put on a face of respectability and arrogance
about conducting similar misdeeds as Jackson did. What Jackson’s
motivations were for joining the Mormons in the first place may have
been similar simplistic reasons used by many to join the settlement. It
provided plenty of opportunities, especially for those unscrupulous
folks who sought only their own aggrandizement. Maybe the rumors of
multiple wives played to Jackson’s interests and he sought elevation to
acquire a few of his own.

Another set of questions arise here and they center around how honest Jo
was with Jackson and how accurate was Jackson at recounting their
interactions and what Jo told him? We’ll do a deep-dive into Jackson’s
full pamphlet expose in coming episodes but the details contained
therein paint a picture of Joseph Smith as a genuinely evil person. What
complicates this analysis even more is that Jackson speaks to what I
know of Joseph Smith quite accurately, albeit in ye olde
19<sup>th</sup>-century language. To anybody reading his exposes,
especially at the time, he fed the hungry wolves the scent of
recently-killed flesh. It could be that Jackson was simply attempting to
capitalize on the public fury motivating the anti-Mormons to a military
campaign against the Nauvoo settlement, just adding energy into the
already destructive feedback loop that would result in the deaths of 3
Smiths and the exile of Mormons from the state of Illinois in only half
a decade’s time. Besides all of this, Jackson made his living in Nauvoo
from one of the greatest acts of deception in our society, counterfeit.
That’s how he paid his bills, making fake money known as Nauvoo bogus,
usually printed to look like Bank of Missouri or Bank of New York coins.
If a person’s chief source of income is lies, can we trust anything they
say?

These complicated factors make Jackson a complicated figure in Mormon
history. He has all the trappings of a typical anti-Mormon so nothing he
says will be believed by the majority of people who study Mormon history
regardless of how reliable it is. But then to believe everything Jo and
Hyrum ever said about Jackson leaves a very simplistic view of good guys
and bad guys in Nauvoo when the world can never be boiled down to that
childish dichotomy. He was a lowly criminal actor within a massive
criminal system and to distrust his statement while believing the
statements of the criminal kingpins is pathetically motivated reasoning.

I see Jackson as the kind of criminal who you could always count on to
steal your wallet but will usually tell you the truth about the gossip
going around town. Joseph Smith strikes me as the criminal who wears a
suit, buys your mortgage from your bank, raises your rent, then
forecloses on you all while smiling and shaking your hand saying he
knows what’s best for you. A person stealing your wallet is criminal and
it sucks, but it doesn’t leave you and your family homeless and
completely ruin your life while you call that person your god because he
wouldn’t possibly lie to you. The wallet thief gets the press, gets
thrown in jail, and lives the rest of his life committing petty crime.
The mortgage thief never has an article written about him, never goes to
jail, and gets richer every day by continuing to commit these legal
crimes until he gets elected president. Both are opportunists, but the
former suffers from a lack of scope of their crimes.

Joseph Jackson made his money by literally making his money. Joseph
Smith made his money by creating an entire society which relied upon his
every word to survive, and he fed the sheep just enough drivel to keep
them hungry for more. Both are profoundly dishonest but only one
requires religion to work. What’s even more interesting to me is that
the issue with bogus money and Jo hiding his fugitive cousin, Jeremiah
Smith, from the law for his counterfeiting in New York, were the most
effective accusations against Jo by the Nauvoo Expositor. At least, they
were the accusations which stuck the most and were immediately dealt
with. In many ways, these were the two tangible crimes the people could
hold on to which personified the problems with the Mormon criminal
empire. It wasn’t bound to the same system of rules the rest of society
adheres to and therefore needed to be brought down.

It’s amazing to me that people will tolerate criminality until there’s a
simplistic example or personification of the larger problem which is
easily comprehensible. Bogus was something the Mormons and non-Mormon
settlements outside Nauvoo constantly groaned under, but until Jackson
was outed as the primary bogus maker, nothing was actually done about it
beyond harboring resentment. Joseph Smith chairing his own court
hearings and producing witnesses to come to any conclusion in his court
which would benefit him the most was a problem people groaned about, but
until Jeremiah Smith was seeking refuge in Nauvoo, the people didn’t
have a personification of the problem to grasp. JOSEPH SMITH WAS THE
PROBLEM, not Jeremiah Smith or Joseph H. Jackson. The criminal empire of
Mormonism was the problem, not the ancillary victims or beneficiaries of
it. As a society, we don’t have the tools to put an entire system on
trial, only individuals within that system. We don’t have a succinct way
of determining the utility or benevolence of a large system with
thousands of participants and infinite moving parts, we can only deal
with people operating inside that system. What’s even crazier to me is
that the Nauvoo Expositor, and even Jackson’s expose, discussed polygamy
and the horrible decrepit conditions women were kept in to serve the
highest-ranking men of the society, but absolutely nothing was done to
solve those problems. Hundreds of victims of a patriarchal system,
thousands of instances of rape over years, all these criminals got off
scot free.

Look at the church today. Sitting on a dragon’s lair of ill-gotten
wealth sucked from millions of people who’ve been lied to systematically
for a century and a half, perpetuating colonialism and racial and
religious supremacy, flaunting taxes while exercising a heavy hand in
national and worldwide politics, exchanging money with people in hostile
foreign countries with absolutely no traceability, and shielding sexual
predators for generations, providing opportunities for them to continue
their predatory practices and harboring these fugitives because they’re
just good guys. Once in a while an accountant or bishop will be
prosecuted with the church’s law firm defending them, making a slap on
the wrists seem to great a punishment because it’s a religion. But at
the end of the day, we don’t have a way to put an entire system on
trial. We don’t have a way of adjudicating whether or not Mormonism is
an acceptable organization to keep around or if it should be broken to
pieces for constant and flagrant abuse of laws and legal protections
religions get. It’s not criminal to run a cult, whether religious or
political, and that is one of the greatest trappings of society today.
We don’t have a way to keep systems like this in control, so we instead
make sacrifices of individuals within the system. John D. Lee was
executed by firing squad for killing 120 people in a meadow in the Utah
territory, but the system which radicalized him, the people who
brainwashed him to believe that in some world it was the right thing to
do to kill those people, they never took the stand and Lee wasn’t even
executed until nearly 20 years after the crime was committed because
Mormonism shielded him from justice. The guy actually responsible for it
has statues and universities bearing his face and name.

It does no good to attack individuals within a system without putting
the system itself on trial but we as a society haven’t yet developed
those tools. I would argue that attacking individuals within a criminal
system is actually counterproductive to stopping abuses committed by
that system. Case in point, Joseph Smith was a criminal kingpin and
became the victim of vigilante justice when the standard justice system
was unable to prosecute him, but Mormonism went on unfettered and
continued its abuses. The people felt justice had been served to some
degree. Similarly, Joseph Jackson may have been one of the primary bogus
makers in Nauvoo, but attacking him only caused him to switch sides to
antagonizing the Mormons and forced him into hiding to escape the legal
system. Once he fled and dissociated from Mormonism, bogus-making
continued in his absence. Notably as well, in late 1845, when the Nauvoo
Charter was revoked and the schism crisis was in full swing, Bloody
Brigham Young was about to be arrested for counterfeit money but
resolved it was time for the Mormons to flee Illinois, and he quickly
set up shop in modern-day Omaha, Nebraska, known as Winter Quarters, and
the following year he led hundreds of Mormons into the Great Basin where
a new era of genocide and theocracy could kick off unfettered by any
system of justice.

So, while Jackson is the personification of it, counterfeit and bogus
was just one small criminal aspect of Nauvoo Mormonism, he was only a
symptom of the much larger problem; that of a corrupt superstructure
which never answered for its crimes.

Thank Christopher Smith. Check out Wall Street Petting Zoo, Dreams from
My Brain, and the Sunstone History Podcast to hear more from him or
check the show notes for his facebook and twitter.

Did you hear the latest?  
Oh dear, what did he do now?

He actually tried to extort a president of another country to attack his
political opponent\!

Oh, yeah. I read the transcript of the call… So… what’re you going to do
about it?\!

He should be impeached\!

Yeah, but what are you going to DO about it?

He has to answer for high crimes and misdemeanors\!

Yeah yeah yeah, I agree, and he’s a criminal, the whole party is
corrupt, and this is one simple thing we can all grasp and get our heads
around. What are you GOING TO DOOOO About it so he doesn’t get us all
killed?\!

… I’m gunna write an angry tweet and tag him.

Okay. You’re gunna get us all killed.

[<u>\[1\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref1)[<u>
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=umn.31951002288020p\&view=1up\&seq=328</u>](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=umn.31951002288020p&view=1up&seq=328)

[<u>\[2\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref2)
Melanokos book

[<u>\[3\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref3)
Joseph H. Jackson, *A Narrative of the Adventures and Experience of
Joseph H. Jackson in Nauvoo, Disclosing the Depths of Mormon Villainy*
(Warsaw, Ill.: Signal Office, 1844), 4-5,[<u>
http://www.olivercowdery.com/smithhome/1840s/1844Jack.htm</u>](http://www.olivercowdery.com/smithhome/1840s/1844Jack.htm).

[<u>\[4\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref4)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-minute-book-3-february-1841-8-february-1845/19</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/nauvoo-city-council-minute-book-3-february-1841-8-february-1845/19)

[<u>\[5\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref5)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-29-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-29-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1)
;[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-30-november-1842-a-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-30-november-1842-a-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1)

[<u>\[6\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref6)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-30-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-30-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1)
;[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-30-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/minutes-30-november-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-b/1)

[<u>\[7\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref7)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1)
; Jackson subpoena:[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-3-december-1842-b-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/subpoena-3-december-1842-b-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1)

[<u>\[8\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref8)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/1)

[<u>\[9\]</u>](https://d.docs.live.net/806b71f6428e0346/Documents/My%20Papers/Academic%20Papers/Notes%20and%20Reviews%20on%20Documents/Review%20of%20Jackson%5eJ%20Joseph%20H.%20-%20The%20Thrilling%20Adventures%20of%20Joseph%20H.%20Jackson.docx#_ftnref9)[<u>
https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-circuit-court-copy-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/3</u>](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/docket-entry-between-30-november-and-circa-3-december-1842-circuit-court-copy-city-of-nauvoo-v-davis-for-slander-of-js-c/3)
